=== PAGE 1 ===
Requested For : Salvo, Dalton Paul (Salvo, Dalton 
Paul) 
Resource Request Slip Letter 
Request Type: Patron digitization request 
Request ID: 1·6164405040004 70 I 
Aristotle's De motu animalium : text with 
translation, commentary, and interpretive essays 
I 
By: Aristotle. 
fSBN: 069 1 072248 
Imprint: Princeton, N .J. : Princeton U nivers ity Press, 1978. 
Location: Science Library 
Destination: Sc ience Library C irculation 
Request Note:"The Role of Phantas ia in A ristotle's Explanation of Action"; 
pp 221-270 
I 1/17/2020 
Call Number: 
QL41 .A724 
1978 


=== PAGE 2 ===
-


=== PAGE 3 ===
Aristotle's 
DE JJOTU AN/1t1ALIUA1 
* 
Text with Translation, Commentary, 
and Interpretive Essays by 
1\IARTHA CRAYEX XUSSBAUl\l 
1978 
PRl~CETON UNIVERSITY PRESS 
PRI~CETON 
--.. 


=== PAGE 4 ===
Copyright © 1978 by Princeton L' niversity Press 
Published by Princeton L'niversity Press, Princeton, New Jersey 
In the L' nited Kingdom: Princeton University Press, 
Guildford, Surrey 
All rights Resen·ed 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data will be 
found on the last printed page of this book 
Publication of this hook has been aided by a grant from The 
Andrew \\'. l\follon Foundation 
This book has been composed in Linotype Janson 
Printed in the United States of America hv Princeton 
University Press, Princeton, New jersey 


=== PAGE 5 ===
To the memory of my father, George Craven, 1901-1972 


=== PAGE 6 ===


=== PAGE 7 ===
CO~TE~TS 
ACK:-,.;OWLEDG:\lE:-,.;Ts 
IX 
ABBRE\'IATIO~S l.'SED FOR \\·oRKS OF ARISTOTLE 
XI 
ABBRE\'IATIO:-,.;s t,·si-:D FOR JOURXAI.S A:-,.;D REFERE:-,.;cE WORKS 
XU 
l~TROl>t:cno:-,.; 
X\" 
I 
AcTuE:-.;T1cnY, TEXT TRA:,,.:s:\11ss10:,,.:, A~D ~l..\~cscR1PTs 
1 
Chapter 1. The Authorship and Daring of the De .\lotu 
A11i11rnli11111 
3 
Chapter 2. The J\lanuscripts 
13 
II 
TEXT .um TRA:-.;s1.AT10:-,.; 
19 
Note on the Translation 
20 
Text 
25 
Translation 
24-
111 
l~TERPRETl\'E 
ESSAYS 
57 
Essay 1: Aristotle on Teleological Explanation 
59 
The Dcmocrirean Challenge 
61 
The Le,·cl of Explanation: Form and J\latter 
67 
Teleology: The Direction of Explanation 
H 
Self-Maintaining Systems 
76 
Functions 
81 
Teleology and Intentionality 
85 
Teleology and Necessity 
88 
Teleology and the Cni,·erse 
93 
Appendix: The Function of J\lan 
100 
Essay 2: The De .Hotu A11i11rnlium and Aristotle's Scien-
tific Method 
107 
The MA and Pbysics VIII 
1 If 
Animal Motion and Hca,·enlv 1\lotion 
121 
Chapters 1 and 2: introdu~rory remarks on animals 12 1 
Chapters 3 and 4: the arguments for an external 
unmoved mover 
12 5 
Essav 3: The S11111pbuto11 P11e1mw and the De 1\lotu 
· 
A11i11"1li11111's Account of Soul and Bodv 
1-+3 
The p11eu11w and hylomorphism 
146 
The pneuma and Aristotle's theory of matter 
158 
Essay 4: Practical Syllogisms and Practical Science 
165 
Necessity and the Practical-Theoretical Parallel 
175 
VII 


=== PAGE 8 ===
/ 
CONTENTS 
The Practical Syllogism in the /)e Al otu 
18-¾ 
The Syllogism in EN VII and DA III 
201 
Rules and Practical Consistency 
210 
Essay 5: The Role of Pbamasi,1 in Aristotle's Explana-
tions of Action 
221 
Phantasia in the accounts of action 
232 
The use and range of pb,111ti1sia 
2-¾1 
Phantasia and aistbesis 
25 5 
Pbantasia and orexis 
261 
Pbamasia and thinking 
265 
IV 
CoMME:--:TARY 
271 
Chapter 1 
2 7 3 
Chapter 2 
286 
Chapter 3 
292 
Chapter 4 
311 
Chapter 5 
325 
Chapter 6 
33 I 
Chapter 7 
HI 
Chapter 8 
3 5 3 
Chapter 9 
369 
Chapter 1 O 
3 7-+ 
Chapter 11 
3 79 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
387 
ISDEX 
401 
ISDEX OF PROPER 1':AMES 
ISDEX LOCORUM 
Vlll 
406 
412 


=== PAGE 9 ===
ACKNOWLEDG.l\lE~TS 
This book could not have been written without the Society 
of Fellows at Harvard, which supported me generously dur-
ing its preparation and made it possible for me to spend a 
year in England, during which much of the work was 
completed. 
Aristotle wrote of philosophical studies that ••it is not easy 
to he continuouslv active in solitude; but with others and 
towards others it is easier" ( EN 1 I 70a5-7). This book owes 
an enormous debt to those whose philosophical acumen and 
whose friendship inspired and encouraged me through many 
drafts. ,\Iv first thanks are due to G. E. L. Owen, who sug-
gested thfs as a thesis topic and supported me through evci:y 
stage in my ,,·ork. His dedication, his boundless energy, 
and his incish·e intellect are a model for me, as they arc for 
everyone working in this field. To Terence Irwin, my 
second thesis reader, I am grateful for a detachment and a 
lucidity that repeatedly engendered productive dissatisfac-
tion with current progress. i\ly understanding of various 
problems connected with practical reasoning and the prac-
tical syllogism owes much to conversations and corres-
pondence with Da,·id \ Vig-gins; the whole hook owes more 
still to his insight, encour~gement, and friendship. Conver-
sations with Nelson Goodman and Thomas Nagel were in-
valuable for mv revisions of what is now Essav ... 5. In Albert 
Henrichs, the ·text and many portions of th~ commentary 
found a critic both diligent and acute. Gerasimos Santas 
and Aforianne .\kDonald read the entire manuscript with 
great care and made a number of valuable suggestions. Dur-
ing the final stages of revision I was stimulated bv conver-
sations \,·ith Hilary Putnam and John Rawls, b{· forceful 
criticisms from Zeph Stewart, and b!· questions f;·om Bruce 
Altshuler and the students in m!· Philosopl,:,· 105. I par-
ticularly wish to thank Norman .\lalcolm for gi,·ing me per-
ix 


=== PAGE 10 ===
ARISTOTLE'S DE .\IOTU ANI.\IAUC..:.\t 
is for Aristotle the motivation behind ethical inquiry and defines 
its aims and limitations. 
In the service of these needs, Aristotle proposed the practical 
syllogism as a model for explanation. His use of the practical-
theoretical parallel elucidates the notions of wanting an end, 
understanding a necessity, and undertaking action; it indicates 
what an adequate explanation will look like and what psycho-
logical states can be regarded as sufficient conditions for action. 
As elaborated for human agents, the theory also indicates that 
the rational agent will justify his actions by showing how they 
fit into some system of ends that he has worked out and is 
continuing to work out for himself. To have some such network 
and to act accordingly is necessary for rationality. But here 
Aristotle stops short. He docs not characterize the system of 
ends as closed and consistent or as a deductive framework de-
pending on a priori first principles. He vigorously denies that 
ethics can be made scientific in this way, adopting a picture of 
practical conflict and practical truth that is implicitly opposed 
to the Socratic picture and contests both the possibility and 
the desirability of its aims. To oppose this project of a science 
of practice is not, for Aristotle, to concede much to the obscure 
or the mysterious; he continues, as the practical syllogism indi-
cates, to demand a great deal of explanations and even implies 
that every action is potentially explicable. But his scientific 
optimism is not Socratic, linked as it is with a very different 
account of the nature of practical knowledge and of the moral 
emotions. Socrates, in ~ictzsc:hc's telling phrase, looked at the 
practical conflicts embodied in tragedy with "one great Cyclops 
eye" (BT,§ 14) and failed to discriminate differences of depth 
and distance. Everything appeared to form part of the same 
plane, all goods }\·ere commensurable. Aristotle's richer and 
more balanced vision secs as the end of ethics not "salvation" or 
scientific sureness, but a constantly evolving rational agreement 
among competent and serious men. 
220 


=== PAGE 11 ===
ESS.-\ Y 5 
THE ROLE OF PHAXT.4.S/.4. I~ ARISTOTLE'S 
EXP 1..-\ ~ .·\ T I O ~ 0 F .-\CT IO~ 
"We sec our lives from our own point of ,·icw; that is the 
privilege of the weakest and humblest of us." 
Isabel Archer. in Henry James's 
The Portrait of ,1 Lady 
Studies of Aristotle's theory of phwt,ui,1 have often been one-
sided. Critics claim that in introducing and developing the notion, 
Aristotle's main interest was in explaining how we can be de-
luded by false appearances such as hallucinations and dreams 
and, on the other hand, how we arc able to retain a memory of 
an object in its absence. Studies that claim priority for this set 
of interests, using De Anim,1 Ill.3 and parts of the Pt1rtt.:a 
Naturalia as their main texts, have tended to neglect the many 
problems connected with the broad role Aristotle gives phm1t,1sia 
in the explanations of action in DA I I I .9-11 and in the De i\fotu 
Animalium, and the difficulties in working out what connections 
Aristotle means to claim there arc among phmtasi,1, desire 
(orexis), and thinking (noesis). This area of Aristotle's concern 
is left to one side as parasitic on the first and of smaller interest 
philosophically. Freudenthal, for example, remarks: "Aber die 
Besprcchung allcr diescn Punkte wiirde cine Ausfiihrlichkcit 
verlangcn, die mit dcr \ Vichtigkcit des Gcgcnstandes in keincm 
V erhaltnis steht: sic muss dahcr hicr untcrbleibcn." 1 
But an understanding of these neglected passages seems to be 
crucial for the analysis of Aristotle's theory of action. For 
phantasia and desire arc jointly necessary conditions for animal 
motion (DA 4321>15 ff.), and phantasia is a necessary condition 
for desire (43 3h26-30), which must "prepare" desire before 
1 Freudenthal, Phant,isi,1, 59. 
221 


=== PAGE 12 ===
L
ARISTOTLE'S DE .\IOTV ANI.\IAUU.\I 
desire can lead to action (,\IA 8, 702n 18 ff.). If we succeed in 
accounting for pha11tasia's role in these passages, we will have 
shed much light, as well, on other accounts of its activities. For 
it is unsound to assume that we should use the few "decaying-
sense" passages that mention phm1t,1sia to illuminate the action 
contexts, but not vice versa; the latter arc just as valuable evi-
dence of Aristotle's interests and views. Aristotle uses the verb 
phainesthai (appear) and related words in the analysis of a wide 
range of experiences. His account of the faculty of phmtasia 
seems to be closely tied to his usage of the verb and suggests a 
very general interest in how things in the world appear to living 
creatures. This interest is developed both in his treatment of 
the special problems of delusion, dreaming, and memory, and 
in his study of motivation, where the faculty is given the central 
role we have indicated. There seems to be no canonical theory 
of phantasia in Aristotle, but rather a number of assorted ob-
servations, sometimes apparently inconsistent, of varying length 
and technicality. Even the detailed exposition in DA 111.3 is 
internally inconsistent on a number of important points; it 
should not be used, as it often is, as the key to all other uses of 
phantasia and related words in Aristotle. It will be argued that 
only Aristotle's basic interest in appearing, and not the decaying-
sense theory put forward at the end of II 1.3 and in parts of the 
PN, can serve to explain the extended role ascribed to phmtasitl 
in action contexts. 
Any analysis of Aristotelian phantasia must confront a certain 
prevalent view of its workings: that phantasmata in Aristotle arc 
always mental images that resemble the things they represent 
and arc to be contemplated as internal pictures by the living 
being. Aristotle's general claims that all thinking requires 
phantasmata arc usually interpreted to mean that thinking re-
quires such internal objects as its raw material. 2 The suggestion 
is that Aristotle was led, in his desire to explain delusion by 
dreams, etc., to form a theory of imagining that requires a 
2 This theory is given a particularly clear exposition in Sorahji's Aristotle 
on A1mzory, 6; also sec Hamlyn's note on DA 43 I a8 and those of Hicks on 
42s 0 11, 433t.2s. 
222 
•


=== PAGE 13 ===
I ~TFR PR FTI \ T ESSAYS 
pictorial representatin· image to accompany e,·ery thought, and, 
possibly, every perception. Om: reason for the neglect of the 
action contexts is that it is assumed we have explained them 
sufficiently once we have read mental images into them. 
3 
There is, however, much less evidence for the imagc-,·icw of 
pha11tasia than has usually been supposed. Images do not seem 
to be central to the thcon·. ,1or is the thcon· vulnerable to many 
of the objections we might raise against a;1 image theory. The 
clear connection of ph111t,1si,1 and phmt,1s111'1 with a theory of 
pictorial representative images is limited to a few passages in 
the DA and the PX, ,,·here Aristotle is constructing a phy-
siological hypothesis concerning "decaying sense." (Nor arc 
phantasia and ph111t,1Sm,1 Aristotle's only or even favorite terms 
in such contexts.) There arc many more passages that could 
quite adequately be explained without invoking images and 
where it seems more fruitful to emphasize the connection with 
phainesthai. Some passages ma kc no sense at all if images arc 
read in. The extension of phmt,1si,1's role in action contexts to 
cover operations concurrent with those of ,1isthesis and in the 
presence of the object is especially hard to explain using images 
as a key. 
The prevalence of the image view of pha11t,1si,1 can in part be 
explained by the prevalence of the empiricist view of imagination 
and related phenomena. ;\lany previous Aristotle scholars ap-
peared unable to conceive of any alternative to this interpre~a-
tion-except the clearly false view that ph111t,1sia is, for A_ris-
totle, a kind of propositional judgment. 4 Since the image view 
seemed generally satisfactory to many critics who ascribed it 
to Aristotle, it was easy for them to extend it into passages th~t 
gave no direct evidence of its presence. But it should be plam 
3 As is the usual practice of Ross (DA), Hicks, and Hamlyn. R~es's 
"Aristotle's Treatment'' is more flexible in approach, but still dwells httlc 
on the serious problems raised by DA 111.9-11 and the ,\IA. 
. 
• Thus Recs, for example, reads c,·cry passage either as a "propoSl-
tional" use (involving a quasi-judgment) or as importing images. \Ve m~st 
examine Aristotle's generic notion of the kritika (faculties that make dis-
tinctions) and ask in what respects ph,mt.1si,1 is like and unlike judgment. 
(Cf. the note on 700"20.) 
223 


=== PAGE 14 ===
ARISTOTLE'S DE MOTU ANI.\IAUU,\I 
by now that it is not the only account of such questions to be 
given, and hence need not be Aristotle's if he is discussing these 
questions. A look at some of the shortcomings of an image 
theory may help us to approach Aristotle's account both with 
less bias and with sharper critical perception. 
The theory that has been espoused by many and frequently 
ascribed to Aristotle I shall take to make the following two 
basic claims : 
(I) Imagination in all cases involves images that represent 
in virtue of some similarity. 5 
(2) Imagination always involves two logically (though not 
necessarily temporally) distinct processes: the having of an 
image (it is either produced or somehow impressed), and its 
inspection or contemplation. 6 
I take (2) to imply that, as in the case of a picture, I can 
potentially get from the image more information than I inten-
tionally put there when I \Vas producing it. (I) and (2) are 
logically independent. I might hold that the image must be 
similar without granting that there is more to be found in it 
than I put there; I might also insist on the picture-like density 
of the image while allowing it to represent in some other purely 
conventional way. 
There are many ways of attacking this position, and I do not 
intend to examine all the ones that have been tried.7 I will simply 
set out a few objections to the theory for the sake of making my 
own view relatively clear and as an introduction to my account 
of Aristotle. 
5 Not all image theories arc this dogmatic, of course, and I will conclude 
that there is room for some form of image theory as a p,1rt of a general 
theory of awareness. 
6 One recent presentation of an image theory that makes these features 
especially clear is Price's "lmagcless Thinking," esp. 143 ff. 
7 Some of the more interesting criticisms arc: Wittgenstein, Pl, I I.xi; 
Sartre, L' lmaiinaire, especially 20-21; Dennett, Content and Conscioumess, 
132-41. Ryle's chapter on imagination in The Concept of ,Hind is important, 
but confusing on a number of points. Cf. the criticisms by Shorter, "Imagi-
nation," and lshiguro, "Imagination." 
224 


=== PAGE 15 ===
INTERPRETIVE ESSAYS 
(I) One very common line of attack has been to ask about 
the status of the image: what sort of entity is it, and in what 
sort of space? Ho\\' docs a non-physical object come to have 
dimensions? etc. I do not sec that this is a very telling objection. 
It seems in principle no more difficult to account for images 
within a physicalist picture of mind than it is to account for, 
e.g., sensations. The question, "\Yhcrc is the image?" is not 
very different from the familiar problem about the location of 
sensations (i.e., if my pain is identical with a brain state, how 
can I say the pain is in my finger?) and could be solved in the 
same way, whatever way one might choose. 8 If one held a 
physicalist theory that committed one to trying, insofar as possi-
ble, to discard the language of the mental, one would presumably 
get rid of image-talk along with much else. But there are other 
objections that do not depend on such a radical reductionism. 
(2) The theory as it is usually stated claims that images are 
representational, and assumes that they can represent only in 
virtue of some similarity. Similarity is, indeed, taken to be both 
necessary and sufficient for representation. Clearly it is neither. 
Even if we grant for the moment that we al ways imagine by 
means of quasi-pictures, we can sec that the theory gives a 
defective account of what it is for a picture to represent. Repre-
sentation is a type of reference or denotation. 9 But no degree of 
similarity is sufficient to secure this reference. An object closely 
resembles, but docs not represent, a copy of itself. I resemble my 
mirror image, but I do not represent it. On the other hand, 
reference may be secured independently of resemblance; we can 
8 One tactic the physicalist can take against location-objections is to 
identify not my pain with my brain state, but my having of the pain with 
my body's being in a certain condition-cf. T. Nagel, "Physicalism," 
103-4; see also Place's objections to the "phenomenological fallacy" in 
"Is Consciousness a Brain Process?" 28 ff. Price's article (cf. n. 6 supra) 
unfortunately assumes that objections based on location and ontological 
status are the only telling ones chat can be brought against images and 
hence dismisses the difficulties too easily (though not successfully, even 
on this point). 
9 I am not, of course, implying that it is like linguistic denotation-that 
pictures are like words that can be combined to yield a sentence. 
225 


=== PAGE 16 ===
ARISTOTLE'S DE MOTU Al\ll.\fAUU.\I 
make almost anything stand for anything else. 10 A fish may be 
made to symbolize Christ, a bird in flight the incorporeal Holy 
Spirit. Similarity is itself a very unclear notion, 11 and image 
theories have not done much to clarify it. But on no understand-
ing of similarity can similarity plausibly be argued to be a neces-
sary feature in such cases of conventional symbolic referring. 
The tendency to cling to similarity as at least a necessary 
condition of representation is bound up \\'ith another unexamined 
assumption: that there is one way of seeing (and painting) the 
object as it is--an "innocent" view, for fidelity to which all 
copies or images are to be assessed. The object represents to the 
extent that it embodies this real, or pure, vie\\' . 12 But if we look 
more deeply into this notion, it seems to be a myth; representing 
has always been more a matter of interpreting than of reproduc-
10 A very lucid account of these distinctions is in Goodman's LA, espe-
cially chapter I, 3-10, and chapter VI, 225-31. I\1uch of my discussion is 
indebted to his. Another attack on the analysis of representation in terms 
of similarity is Black's "How do Pictures Represent?" 95-129. Various 
suggestions about how reference is secured arc made by Black, by W ollheim 
in "Nelson Goodman," and by Walton in "Arc Representations Symbols?" 
Sec especially the illuminating remarks in \Vittgcnstein's Lectures 011 
Religious Belief, which both undermine the value of similarity as a condi-
tion of reference and reveal the magnitude of the difficulty we get into 
when we try to do without it: 
How do I know that a picture is a picture of Lcwy?-Normally by its 
likeness to Lewy, or, under certain circumstances, a picture of Lewy 
may not be like him, hue like Smith. If I give up the business of being 
like (as a criterion), I gee into an awful mess, because anything may be 
his portrait, gi\·en a certain method of projection (I II, p. 66). 
Lewy makes the promising suggestion that "the connection is a conven-
tion"; Wittgenstein urges him to spell this out in terms of learning a rule, 
a practice. A problem with this suggestion is that we may then be hard 
put to explain how artists modify our practices by insisting on an uncon-
ventional connection, as in the Picasso example below, n. 13. 
11 Cf. Goodman's "Seven Strictures," 437-46. 
12 Cf. Goodman, LA, 6 ff. Price makes this premise of the theory clear 
when he urges us to call images either "rcprcsentati\·c" or "reproductive," 
as if the two terms were interchangeable ( 14 3). 
226 


=== PAGE 17 ===
INTERPRETIVE ESSAYS 
ing. (Goodman's discussion of perspective properly exposes 
some cherished illusions about the special status of th1t artistic 
convention.) \Ve can never copy an object in all the ways it is; 
we are always representing it as something. And indeed the 
interpretation of reality conveyed in a picture can potentially 
enhance or alter our knowledge of the world. \Ye may see 
things differently because of an artistic experience. \Ve may 
develop an ability to sec in that picture, in other pictures, in 
things, structures and relationships of which we had previously 
been unaware. To the charge that his portrait of Gertrude Stein 
did not look like her, Picasso is said to have replied, "No matter; 
it will." 13 
The copy view of pictorial representation and the image view 
of imagination both, then, embody a seriously defective picture 
of representation that, in turn, relies on an oddly passive picture 
of what it is to sec. I shall try to show that although Aristotle 
occasionally and carelessly makes the more superficial error, 
the most significant contribution of his theory is its attempt to 
avoid the underlying one. 
(3) The Image view strongly implies that if I have an 
X-image there must be some X in the world to which my image 
refers: no image has null denotation. This, once again, is a 
simplistic view of the problem of pictorial reference. \\'hen I 
imagine, what I imagine may not correspond to anything actual; 
as there arc fictional pictures, so there are fictional imaginings, 
and the question of representation must be given a different 
analysis accordingly .14 (It will no doubt be the case that a 
causal account of such fictions will make reference to objects 
in the world, as interpreted, remembered, combined, etc., 
13 Cited by Goodman, I.A, 3 3. Cf. n. IO above. \Ve do not simply reject 
or fail to understand Picasso's claim that this is a portrait of Stein, although 
no technique or practice we h~wc so far learned would enable us to see it 
as such. We do not simply say, Wittgenstein suggests, that it does not 
belong to the game we know (Lectures, 68-69). But it is also true that our 
ability to sec Stein in that picture will be ,·astly enhanced when and if the 
new techniques of representation become com·cntional and part of our 
learning. 
14 On fictional pictures, sec Goodman, LA, 21 ff., and also Walton. 
227 


=== PAGE 18 ===
ARISTOTLE'S DE MOTV ANIMAL/UM 
by the agent, just as a causal account of a Pickwick-picture 
would mention real activities involved in its production. But 
this is not to say that the analysis of its status as a representation 
ought to, or even can, describe it as denotinf{ something actual.) 
This oversight of the image-theorists stems again from their 
oversimple view of perception: the assimilation of seeing to 
receiving the object as it is, or receiving an impress of the object. 
Of course an empiricist proponent of the image view could (as 
some do) invent a way of dealing with the "problem of fictions," 
or its relative, the "problem of hallucinations." But, as Dennett 
has correctly pointed out, the "problem" arises only because of 
other more basic difficulties with the theory; it need not be a 
problem at all. 15 
(4) We granted above that imagining involved objects that 
were like pictures and argued that the image theory had a defec-
tive account of pictures. But it seems plain that imagining need 
not involve anything like a picture. The more trivial point is 
that the image theory persistently ignores auditory, olfactory, 
and tactile images, and hence has no account of them that would 
show that they functioned at all Ii ke visual picture-images. But 
there is a more serious point that, again, marks the failure of 
this theory, so dependent on an aesthetic analogy, to come to 
grips with what a picture is and how it symbolizes. If imagining 
is really like looking at a picture, I can keep going back to it as 
often as I want to discover new information. A picture is in-
formationally dense. It can never be exhaustively described. It 
is there, and without adding anything more to it I can always get 
more out. Is this really what we want to say about imagining? 
I think it provides an account that could, at best, serve for a 
limited range of cases. First, there arc many cases of imagining 
in which the resemblance between the imagining and its object 
is symbolic, but not representational: i.e., the "picture" is not 
dcnse. 16 I might imagine a piece of music by picturing the score, 
16 Dennett, Content, I 3 7 ff. 
16 Cf. Goodman, LA 225 ff. I am using "represent" in Goodman's 
restricted sense, "symbolize" or "refer" as more general rerms for denota-
tional relationships. 
228 


=== PAGE 19 ===
INTERPRETI\.E ESSAYS 
or some books by thinking of their Library of Congress numbers. 
To imagine Valhalla I might picture a palatial dwelling, but I 
might equally well think of its \Vagnerian leitmotif, which de-
notes or names it. In all these cases the symbolic relationship 
will be descriptional, 17 rather than representational. Further-
more, even in cases of picturing, there is not always anything 
that corresponds to stepping back and looking at the picture, 
hence not always the possibility of getting further information. 
Sartre, lshiguro, and possibly \Yittgcnstein 1s go so far as to 
claim that there is never this possibility: there is never more in 
imagining that I intentionally put in; it has just the content with 
which I invest it. Imagining is a lot like sketching, with nothing 
that corresponds to the moment when the artist steps back to 
see what it is he has made. This is. I think, very often the case; 
but the denial that \\'C ever get new or unexpected information 
out of what we imagine seems excessively rigid. A painter may 
visualize different compositions in order to discover which one 
"looks" right to him. If Mozart composed in his head, this does 
not mean that, unli kc an artist who composes at the piano, he 
simply "wrote'' the piece out without "hearing" alternatives 
and judging, as a hearer docs, which was the most appropriate. 
In short, the Sartre view, while illuminating for a range of cases, 
is no more appropriate as a general dogma than the view it is 
intended to supplant. Bur I suspect that even where imagining 
docs yield new information, the analogy to looking at a picture 
is seldom perfect: we very rarely arc dealing with an object 
that is both dense and replete. A lot of the imagining will be less 
17 In the first two cases, the relationship will also be notational; in the 
third, although the syntactic requirements of disjointness and diff erentia-
tion seem to be satisfied, the requirement of semantic disjointness is not: 
not all leitmotifs have discrete compliant-classes. Cf. Goodman, LA, 
151-52, 225-26. 
18 Sartre, 20-21; lshiguro, 166; \Vingenstein's anecdote about King's 
College on fire (Blue Hook, :l9) makes a similar point. Cf. also LtctzlTts, 
Ill, p. 67: "Is thinking of somc.:thing like painting or shooting at some-· 
thing?" Smythies seems to ha,-c hdd the ,·iew attacked here: that a thought 
is something like an internal picture which we can inspect to see what it is: 
"Smythies's muddle is based on the idea of a super-picture" (67). 
229 


=== PAGE 20 ===
ARISTOTLE'S DE .\IOTU AXI.\IAUU.\I 
pictorial than diagrammatic (in that some features that would 
be constitutive in a pictorial scheme arc: dismissed as being 
merely contingent); 19 some information that \\·ould have had to 
have been filled in in a picture may be left quite unspecificd.20 
The image-theory is defective, then, both because it wrongly 
assimilates all imagining to seeing pictures and because it docs 
not even provide an adequate account of pictorial representation. 
In addition, it seems to embody a false distinction between 
copying and interpreting, which explains its neglect throughout 
of the connection between imagining and our intentions and of 
the active, interpretive role of the imaginer. If I have addressed 
myself to the image theory as a theory of imagination, it should 
be clear that these objections wi II also apply, \\·ith suitable ad-
justment, to a more general theory of perceptual a warcness that 
relies centrally on images. And evc:n someone who was not 
moved by such objections to discard the image theory of imagi-
nation might find them telling against a theory that invoked 
images to explain thinking or perceiving. But, granted my em-
phasis so far on the diversity of the phenomena and the dangers 
of an overambitious unitary account, is there any one place we 
can begin? And docs Aristotle give us any help in finding a 
beginning? 
I think he docs. But it may be useful first to start in a rather 
backhand way and look for a way of beginning with Aristotle, 
since I intend to argue that most previous interpreters have 
begun in the wrong place. Wittgenstein and others, as a result 
of their dissatisfactions with the image view, went on to use the 
general notion of "seeing as" or "seeing an aspect" to elucidate 
imagining and related phenomcna. 21 (Wittgenstein seems to 
claim only that the logic of the two concepts is similar; Ishiguro 
takes the further step of suggesting that imagination should be 
viewed as a sort of "seeing-as.") Such investigations seem to 
19 On rcplcccncss and density, cf. Goodman, l.A, 229-30. 
2° Cf. Dcnnctt's remarks on the puzzle of the dn:am-rigcr with count;tblc 
stripes, 136 ff. 
21 Wittgenstein, Pl, II.xi; Jshiguro, especially 176--78. 
230 


=== PAGE 21 ===
11':TERPRF.Tl\"E ESSAYS 
provide a promising avenue of approach to Aristotle's theory. 
For what ph1i1ut,1i F to someone is, after all, what is seen by him 
as F. His ph1i11ommo11 ,1g,1t/1011 is his view of the good.22 The 
phai11omen,1 arc things in the world as sem (and reported) by 
human observers. This broad interest in how things appear to 
sentient beings seems to form the basis for Aristotle's more 
specialized discussions of envisaging and of the sort of awareness 
that leads to action, much as, in Ishiguro·s account, the concept 
of "seeing-as" is basic to the elucidation of the more specialized 
concepts of imagining and picturing. 23 
It will be argued, on the basis of a survey of the uses of 
pha11tasia and ph111t,1sm,1 both before Aristotle and in his work, 
that the most fruitful approach in dctcm1ining what is meant in 
any given context is always to remain aware of the connection 
with the verb ph1i11esth1i and to find images only where there is 
concrete evidence of their presence. \Ve should not assume 
lightly that Aristotle is producing a bad theory based on a tech-
nical usage rather than a subtler theory more closely tied to 
ordinary usage. There wi 11 be some passages where Aristotle 
does refer to picture-Ii kc Hi nternal objects;" some where he 
merely invokes episodes of envisaging; some where his interest 
in the faculty of ph111t,1Ji,1 is the still more general one of how 
it is that one secs X as F, or ascribes some content to the object 
of one's actual percl·ption. \Ve can decide what is in view only 
by understanding what questions, in each case, Aristotle is 
asking. After surveying the variety of questions pha11tasit1 is 
invoked to answer, we \\'ill be in a better position to appreciate 
its role in the accounts of action in ,\IA 6 ff. and DA 111.9-11 
and the contribution of these accounts to Aristotle's psychology. 
But first let us sketch the problems of interpretation with which 
these accounts confront us. 
22 Cf. especially EN 111.4-5. Then.· is an illuminating discussion of these 
chapters and their importance for Aristotle's account of intentional action 
in Furlcy's "Self /\-10\'crs." 
2a Arisrotlcs' ph,1inesth11i seems to he a broader notion than "seeing-as" 
(especially as discussed by \Vittgcnstcin), and the comparison will not 
prove equally illuminating in all contexts. 
231 


=== PAGE 22 ===
ARISTOTLE'S DE MOTL,' ASI.HAUUM 
PHANTAsrA •~ THE Accot::!':Ts OF Acno!'-1 
At the end of the third book of the De Anima and in chapters 
6-8 of the De 1vlotu Animalium, Aristotle tries to determine 
what faculties we must ascribe to animals in order to be able 
to explain why and how they move towards their goals. In 
these contexts, more explicitly than in any others, he gives a 
central place to the faculty of phm1tasia, claiming that it functions 
even when actual perceiving and/or thinking arc going on. The 
sixth chapter of the J\f A begins by listing phamasia as one of the 
faculties that should be mentioned in an explanation of animal 
motion (7QQbl 7 ff.). Among these there arc two major sub-
groups: kinds of desiring and kinds of discerning or apprehend-
ing.24 Phantasia, along with aisthesis and 11ous (or dim1oia), is a 
member of this second group, the "distinction-making faculties" 
(kritika), which seem to do two jobs in connection with action: 
they present co the animal some object of desire and they present 
the concrete situation as an example of what is or is not desired. 
It appears from the sketchy account in chapter 6 that any one 
of the three kritika can operate without the other two, and in 
combination with some sort of orexis, to produce action. 
Phantasia and aisthesis are said to "hold the same place" as 
noesis in a scientific explanation. As far as we arc told, the com-
binations desire + sense perception and desire + thinking 
would be sufficient to "move" the animal, without any involve-
ment of phantasia. 
Two subsequent passages suggest the same picture: (1) 
701 1129: "For whenever a creature is actually using sense-
perception or phantasia or thought towards the thing for-the-
sake-of-whic..:h ... "; (2) 701a32: "'Herc's drink,' says 
sense-perception or phantasia or thought." Both passages offer a 
straightforward disjunction of faculties. In the first, any one of 
the three can present the object of desire. In the second, any 
one of the three can offer the information about the concrete 
24 This distinction cuts across the Platonic "rational-irrational" distinc-
tion {criticized by Aristotle in DA 111.9) and prepares the way for a 
unitary account of all animal activity. 
232 


=== PAGE 23 ===
l~TERPRETt\·E ESSAYS 
situation that constitutes the minor premise of a practical syl-
logism. Both of these passages occur in the discussion of the 
syllogism, where Aristotle is concerned to show how cognition 
and desire must be combined in order for action to result, less 
concerned to analyze the interrelationships of the various 
cognitive faculties. 
But further on in the same discussion, when offering a more 
careful and schematic account of the steps that lead to action, 
Aristotle gives p!M11t,1si,1 a broader role: 
For the affections suitably prepare the organic parts, desire 
the affections, and ph111t,1si,1 the desire; and phmtasia comes 
about either through thought or through sense-perception 
(702
1118 ff.). 
Phantasia, then, is involved in every action; it must "prepare" 
the desire whether or not actual perceiving is going on. 25 It is 
said to have two sources: sense-perception or thinking. It looks 
as though its job is to present the perceived or thought object 
to the creature in such a way that it can be moved to act. Similar 
statements arc made in the DA's parallel account. At 432h15, 
motion is said to be "always with both phalltasia and desire; " 26 
at 433h26-30, Aristotle writes: "Insofar as an animal has the 
capacity to desire, thus far it is a self-mover; but it cannot 
desire without phimt,ui,1. All phi1ntasit1 is connected either with 
25 Cf. also 70ih33-H, where the heating or chilling is said to follow, of 
necessity, the "thought or phamasia" of the object of pursuit or avoidance. 
The omission of ,1isthesis might be just careless. But it might also be that 
aisthesis alone is insufficient to present the object of pursuit or avoidance to 
the animal in such a way that desire becomes acti\'c and action follo,1,•s. 
Aisthesis was also omitted from the original list of "mO\·ers of the animal" 
(700hJ 8), although it was included in the list of cognitive faculties that 
immediately followed. 
26 All manuscripts read e rather than k,1i before orexeos, but the reading 
kai is attested in Thcmisrius ( whose authority at least equals that of the 
manuscripts) and is confirmed by what follows. fai is accepted by Ross 
in both his edition-commentary and his OCT. E,·en if we read e, we still 
find that phantasi,1 is the only cogniti,·c faculty that is mentioned as neces-
sary for motion, and we arc told at 4-3 3n,20 that when phi111tasi,1 imparts 
motion it docs not do so without orexis. 
233 


=== PAGE 24 ===
ARISTOTLE'S DE AWTU ANl,\tfAUU/\1. 
thinking or with perception." This echoes the two main claims 
of the De Motzt account: that phantasia is necessary for the 
operations of desire and that it is of two types: the type con-
nected with thinking (the logistike) and the type connected 
with aisthesis. In the following chapter (III. I I), Aristotle dis-
cusses a class of lower animals that he calls "the incomplete 
creatures," asking how it is that they can move. To answer 
this question he must pose two others: "Do they have desire?" 
and "Do they have phantasia?" The answer to the first is that 
they evidently have epithumia, which is a species of desire. 
Aristotle never doubts that they have aisthesis-this is, after all, 
his criterion for calling something an animal in the first place. 
But it would apparently be insufficient to claim that they move 
in virtue of their possession of aisthesis and of epithumia. Aris-
totle rather grudgingly admits that, undeveloped as they are, 
they have some vague sort of phantasia, since they do, in fact, 
move. The chapter concludes with a recapitulation of the dis-
tinction between the two species of phantasia: the one peculiar 
to rational creatures is now called the deliberative (bouleutike) 
and Aristotle gives an example of its functioning (433hJI-
43411IO-cf. pp. 263-65). 
We have had so far a number of mysterious hints about the 
connection between phantasia and sense-perception; there is 
another passage of the DA that appears more peculiar still, 
but that eventually may help us to clarify the picture. At 
43za31, he says that the being (the einai) of phantasia is different 
from the being of any other faculty, but that phantasia might 
still be "the same as" some other faculty. In the De Insomniis 
(4598 I 5) he tells us that it is "the same as" the faculty of aisthesis, 
but different from that faculty in its einai. It is hard to know 
what Aristotle means when he says two faculties are "the 
same;" for one thing, he is not very careful to tell us "the same 
what." 27 Even if we assume he means "the same faculty" or 
"capacity" (as he explicitly says in the similar passage, EN 
1141 hZJ; and cf. 11308 1 I), it remains unclear whether his mean-
ing is that these are names for two different ranges of activity 
27 On this sec White, "Aristotle on Sameness," and Wiggins, /STC, 
1-2, 27. 
234 


=== PAGE 25 ===
INTERPRETIVE ESSAYS 
of a general cognitive power (regarded as a single power be-
cause neither range is found in creatures that lack the other, 
and both require the same bodily apparatus to get going), or 
whether the linkage is tighter still: an activity of this power can 
be regarded as an exercise of either the phantasia-capacity or 
the aisthesis-capacity, depending on the aspect to which we 
direct our attention. Aristotle• s use of the terms phantastikon 
and aisthetiko11 rather than phamasia and aisthesis support the 
second reading: he says not that two activities are based on a 
single capacity but that two capacities are the same, implying 
that activities traceable to the one could also, under some de-
scription, be traced to the other. Further support for the "two-
description" reading can be derived from a number of other 
passages in which Aristotle speaks of difference in einai: J\1etaph. 
XI. 10, 1066a 33, where the road up and the road down are said 
to be one, but different in ei11,1i; similar remarks at DA 424
1125 
and 425h25 about the actuality of aisthesis and of its object; 
and Menz. 45Qb2 I, where it is claimed that we can regard the 
painted animal either as a Ii keness or as an animal ("but the 
eina.i is not the same for both"). And EN V, 1 I 3011. I 2 tells us 
that arete is the name of the virtuous disposition si111pliciter, 
dikaiosune its name in its aspect of relating to other human 
beings. This seems to suggest not that there are some activities 
of the disposition that are other-directed and some which are 
not, but rather that qua other-directed they have a different 
name and a different dcscription. 28 
We can, then, reasonably infer several things from Aris-
totle's statement that the aisthetikon and the phantastikon are 
28 Two passages that might be used to support a "separate-activities" 
interpretation do not tell either way. At EN J 14Jh23 ff., the statement 
that politikl and phronesis arc "the same disposition" (he auti hexis) but not 
the same in einai is often interpreted to mean that politik? is practical wisdom 
concerning one's dealings with other men, phronesis practical wisdom con-
cerning the realization of one's own good. But read in the context of the 
chapter as a whole it seems to indicate, instead, just that phronesis and 
po/itike arc the same \·ircuc seen from different points of view, phrontsis 
being the general name of the disposition, politikt its name when we focus 
on its public consequences. The pti\·atc and the public life of the good 
citizen can be distinguished only logically. (Cf. Stewart's commentary 
235 


=== PAGE 26 ===
ARISTOTU•;·s l)J-; .\IOTL' A.\'I.\IAUUM 
"the same" capacity, but "di ffcrcnt in ei,Mi": (I) All creatures 
that arc capable of perceiving arc capable of phantasia; the 
same physiological apparatus that is sufficient for one is suffi-
cient also for the other. (2) .\lany activities of the aisthetikon 
can also be viewed, in some other way, as activities of the 
phantastikon. (To conclude that all its activities have these two 
aspects would be a stronger claim than Aristotle's other argu-
ments could support.) (3) There is some good reason for using 
both terms, some new information gained by noticing both 
aspects of the disposition and its activities. \\'p still cannot be 
sure whether the aisthetikon and the phmt,1stikon (where they 
arc "the same'') arc related more as the road up and the road 
down, or as the road simplicita and the road down (i.e., the 
relation that exists between Llrt'te and dikaiosune). 
There is little other evidence to support (I). DA III.11 
seemed at least to entertain the possibility that imperfect crea-
tures might have the sense of touch without phmtasia. At DA 
4zsa 1 O ff., Aristotle granted phmt,1siL1 co the bee and the ant, 
but tentatively denied it to the worm. His dokei d'ou in that 
passage expressed uncertainty, and I I I .11 may be seen as a 
resolution of the question in favor of granting it to all self-
movers. At 415a10 ff., Aristotle says that of the perishable 
beings (phtharta) who lack reason, some do not even have 
phantasia and some live by that alone. But phtharta may well 
include plants, so the statement cannot be taken as evidence 
that Aristotle believed there arc animals that lack phantasia. 
Another potentially informative passage, DA 11.2, 41 Jh2I ff., 
is too obscure to be decisive; on the most likely reading, it 
indicates that phantasia and ,1isthesis arc indeed coextensive, but 
for a longer defence of this view.) In .\fe1i1ph. XII (IOiSh.! ff.), the state-
ment that Empcdoclcs' Philia is both a material and an efficient cause, but 
that the einai in these two c.iscs is not rhe same, seems indeed to suggest 
rwo distinct spheres of operation for rhe same figure. But, in fact, there is 
only one process of formation going on. To borrow an image suggested 
by Zcph Stewart, we arc probably meant ro think of Philia as something 
like the yeast in dough: both a constituent and an efficient cause (raising 
agent) of the bread. 
236 


=== PAGE 27 ===
INTERPRETIVE ESSAYS 
that phantasit? has some particular connection with apprehending 
the object of dcsire. 29 
We must now turn to the evidence for the connection of 
phantasia with thinking that substantiates the broad claims of 
J\t[A 8 and DA II 1.10 that all animal motion involves phantasia. 
In I. I of the DA, Aristotle makes the claim that most affections 
of the soul arc "not without" the body: "for the body is 
is affected in some way together with these,, (403°3 ff.). Think-
ing, it is said, seems to be an activity peculiar to the soul: but 
if this is some sort of phant,uia, or not without pht111tasia, it will 
not be without body (403a8-10). In the 1\fA, four passages 
that suggest a close connection between phantasia and thinking 
arc all in contexts where Aristotle is talking about the physio-
logical changes that necessarily accompany psychic processes. 
At 701 n5_7 Aristotle tells us that the bodily alteration that 
leads to motion of the limbs is associated with some activity 
of either aisthesis or ph111t,1sia; the omission of 11oesis might be 
simply careless, but it may also point to the view expressed 
by Aristotle in DA 111.7-8 (cf. pp. 238-40) that all thinking 
requires pha11tasmat,1. For there is a problem for Aristotle in 
29 Discussing the faculties of insects that ha,·c been bisected, Aristotle 
writes: "Both segments h.n-e sense-perception and local motion; if sense-
perception, then ph,mt,1si,1 and desire (ei d'i1isthesi11 kiti ph.mt,1sia11 kai ortxin). 
For where there is sense-perception, there arc also both pain and pleasure; 
and where these arc, there is necessarily appetite." The sentence in 
parentheses, differently punctuated, might yield the sense, "If sense-per-
ception and phamasia, then desire." But the subsequent sentence makes 
aisthesis a sufficient condition for desire. If we are not told that ph.mtasia 
and aisthesis arc cocxrensi,·c. we cannot know that phamasi,1 is a necessary 
condition for orexis. The punctuation I ha\·e chosen, howe,·er, leaves 
phantasia's role in the argument unclear: Aristotle goes on to gi,·e reasons 
for the claim, "If aisthesis. then orexis," but docs nothing analogous for 
phantasia. Perhaps his silence indicates only that he is relying on statements 
elsewhere about the relationship between phantasi,1 and aisthesis. Perhaps, 
howc\'cr, the remarks about pleasure. pain, and appetite tend to show, as 
well, reasons for the ascription of ph&1nt,1sia to all sentient creatures: that 
is, plumtasia has a particular connection with one's awareness of the object 
of desire. This is consistent with the e\·idcncc of DA 111. 7 and 10 and of 
.HA 701"33-35. 
237 


=== PAGE 28 ===
ARISTOTLE'S DE .\IOTU ANI.\IAUU.\f 
setting our the physiological side of his account: he wants to 
say that for every psychic activity there is some physiological 
realization. 30 But what will he say about 11011s? 1 f nous is separa-
ble from body, its activities should certainly nor be describable 
as, or even necessarily correlated with, physiological processes. 
The solution to which .Aristotle seems, for various reasons 
(which we sha11 examine in more detail later), ro incline is 
that in a living body the activities of nous must be linked with 
those of the faculty of phant,1sia, which it would not be im-
plausible to sec as realized in some physiological occurrences. 
701
1134-36 and 7Q3hJ8 again link 11oesis and phantasia in an ac-
count of physiological alterations; 70 I b 17 ff. argues that al-
though the physiological side of aisthesis is more immediately 
apparent than that of the other two cognitive faculties, we sec 
as well that mere thinking, without actual perception, can re-
sult in motion; hence we must conc..·lude that 11oesis and phm1tasia 
are also associated with physiological change. 31 The passage 
implies that it is noesis and pha11tasia together that have "the 
power of the actual things" (7QJbJ8-19). Only thinking is sub-
sequently discussed (701 hZ0-22); so if the introduction of 
phamasia is not otiose we arc, perhaps, to sec that the thinking 
that results in motion does so just because pha11tasi,1, which 
accompanies it, has these physiological associations. 
In passages where he is preoccupied with the physiology of 
action, then, Aristotle implies that the 11oesis that leads to action 
must be accompanied by phamasi,1. The DA makes this connec-
tion very plain: we will conclude thinking is "not without 
body" only if we find it is either a type of phantasia or not 
without phantasia. 
The connection is explored further in DA 111.7, in a discus-
sion of how the object of desire is presented to the animal. 
Aristotle does not consider the possibility (mentioned in I. I) 
that thinking is a type of pha11t,1sia; presumably this is to be 
3° Cf. Essays I and 3. 
31 [ am taking noesantes monon here to mean not "thinking without desire," 
but "thinking (and the accompanying desiring) without actual perception" 
-cf. Essay 3, n. 14. 
238 


=== PAGE 29 ===
INTERPRETIVE ESSAYS 
taken as ruled out by the analyses of 111.3-5. But he does con-
clude that thinking (or at least the thinking preceding action) 
is "not without pha11t,1Sia": 
To the thinking soul, phi111ti1s111at,1 serve as aistliematt1; and 
when it asserts or denies good or bad, it avoids or pursues it. 
Hence the soul never thinks without a pha11t,mn,1 (431 nt 4-17). 
Pha11tas111at,1, and not ,1isthen1t1t,1, provide data for the operations 
of practical reasoning and arc said, in fact, to accompany every 
act of thinking. At 43 Jh2 ff., Aristotle continues: 
The thinking creature, 32 therefore, thinks the forms in the 
phmtasmata; and, since in these what is to be pursued and 
avoided is determined for it, it can be moved even without 
actual perception, when it is concerned with pha1J!,1S111i1t,1. 33 
Pha11tasia (as in MA 701 h I 7 ff.) is invoked to explain how it is 
that the mere thought of some object, in the absence of actual 
perception, can suffice to cause motion. This does not, of course, 
imply that it is onlv in the absence of actual aisthesis that 
phantasi,1 plays this i~portant role; the preceding passage had 
implied the contrary. But it is there that its connection with 
thinking becomes p~~rricularly obvious. Once again, thinking is 
linked to pl1t111t,1Sit1 in order to explain how animals arc moved; 
pha111,1sia, as in the .\IA, is said to present the noetic faculty 
with a "form" (eidos) of its object, Hdctermined" as an object 
of pursuit or avoidance. Exactly what this "form" contributes 
to thinking, and why it is required, is not made explicit. 
Aristotle has, then, made in II I. 7 a very general claim about 
the necessity that acts of thinking be connected with some ac-
tivity of phaJJtasia. Bur the c.:laim was made within the context 
of a discussion of motivation and might be read as applicable 
32 Haml>·n, in his commcnt,1ry on this passage, argues pcrsuasi,·cly that 
to noetikon must be the creature, since it is the subject of the verb of motion. 
33 Cf. Rodi er' s translation and his note on the translation of the hos 
clause. 
239 


=== PAGE 30 ===
ARISTOTUtS nr: .\IOTL' AXI.\IAUL'.\I 
only in action contexts. II 1.8 makes a similar daim about all 
thinking: 
Since there is nothing that has separate existence, it seems, 
apart from pen:eptible magnitmks, the objects of thought arc 
in the perceptible forms, . . . and for this reason unless one 
perceived things one would not learn or understand anything; 
and when one reflects, one must reflect simultaneously \\·ith 
a phmt,1m1t1. 34 For phmt,ism,11,1 arc Ii kc ,1istlzem,1t,1, only with-
out matter (432n3-IO). 
For thinking it is necessary not just that one have had some 
sense-experience (cf. also the daims of A Po 1.18), but that one 
have, simultaneously with the thought, some awareness of the 
sense-experience, in the form of a ph111tas111,1. The faculty of 
aisthesis cannot, alone, suffice to provide the necessary condi-
tions for thinking. It is the phmtasm,1 and ph111t,1si,1 that must 
be mentioned. 
The data of the MA and of DA l I I have yielded some tenta-
tive conclusions and some difficult questions. Aristotle reveals 
a particular interest in the role played by plza11tasit1 in action; 
in these contexts more explicitly than any\\·herc else he rends 
to give it an "umbrella" role, claiming that it functions even 
in cases where actual perceiving and/or thinking arc going on. 
It is closely linked to the operations of desire and somcho\\. 
presents the object of desire to the animal in such a way that 
it can be moved to action . .Aristotle hesitates to ascribe ph,111tasi,1 
to less complex creatures, but concludes that it must belong at 
least to all which arc self-moving. Although he occasionally 
(e.g., in the "drink'' syllogism in ,\IA 7) suggests that percep-
tion or thought alone could operate with desire to produce 
action, his considered view seems to be that an extra factor 
must be mentioned in the account of motion and that there is a 
single faculty (or a special aspect of the faculty of perception) 
34 So ETP, accepted by Biehl, Ro<liL·r, and Hit.·ks. CLUPPSP and Ross 
h.n-c ph,mt,uma ti. 
240 


=== PAGE 31 ===
l~TFRPRETI\.E ESSAYS 
in virtue of which an animal becomes aware of its object of 
desire, whether that obiect is initially presented ,._.;,1 the senses 
or by thought. Furthermore. even theoretical thinking must, it 
seems, go on concurrently with some activity of plw11tasi,1. \Ve 
need to determine now why Aristotle thought perception and 
thought needed this phmt,1Si,1, why it should be supposed that 
there is a single faculty at work in such diverse cases, and what 
its contribution is. \ \'hat is there about ,1isthesis and the ,1isthem,1 
it presents that makL·s this <..'Xtra clement necessary for the 
explanation of action? How docs ph111t,1si,1 help Aristotle ex-
plain thinking? \ \'hat is the eidos that phant,1si11 presents and 
how is that different from \,·hat ,1isthesis presents? In order to 
arrive at even a conjectural solution to these problems, we must 
first look more dosdy at the terms ph111t,1si,1 and ph111ti1smt1, 
deliberately left untranslated in this discussion. By examining 
the use of these words in prc-:\ristotelian and other Aristotelian 
contexts, we will try to determine ho\,. far and in what con-
texts mental images should be invoked to explain ph111t,1si,1 and 
where it is more illuminating to insist on the general connection 
with p/1c1i11tt,1i. 
T 11 E Lr S E 
A :,.; I) R :\ :-.= G E. 
0 F PH A . .Y T .:l S 1 .·l 
The pre-:\ ristotclian use of ph111t,1si,1 and related words 35 fol-
lows a pattern to which :\ristotk's own usage seems to have 
remained generally faithful. Beginning with the earliest attested 
usages there is a tendency to employ phmt,1sm,1 and the verb 
phantaZt'sthai in talking of dreams, memories, and hallucinations, 
sometimes \,·ith a strong implication that what is so character-
ized is some sort of representative image. But these words arc 
not the only or even the most popular ones in such contexts 
(more common arc \\·on.is Ii kc eikon, eido/011, and enup11io11) • 
The ph.111t,1Si,1-\,·ords far more frequently retain their general 
connection with the whok range of usage of the verb phi1i11esthai • 
1" For discussion of some of the Platonic material, sec Recs, 492-93. 
24-1 


=== PAGE 32 ===
ARISTOTLE'S DE MOTU ANI.\IAUU.\l 
The word pha11tasia is, of course, not common before Aristotle; 36 
but phamasma and phi111t,1zesthai occur frequently in a distribu-
tion that has interesting implications. For it is generally con-
ceded that Aristotle often uses phamasia in ways that have 
nothing to do with images and imaging. The proponents of a 
mental-image view of Aristotelian phantasi,1 must lean heavily 
on the words pha11tasma and phamazesthai, claiming that these 
always indicate that mental images arc in question. 3i The early 
evidence shows, however, that phantasma often functions simply 
as the verbal noun of phai11esth,1i and means, in a most general 
way, "what appears." Thus the "phai11011ze11,1, but not onta" 
("what appears, but is not"} of Republic 596 e is picked up by 
"phamasmata, but not onta" at 599 a. At 598 a-b the phantasma 
is what appears, as aletheia is what is. The representative image 
made by the imitator (mimetes) who takes as his model not what 
is, but what appears (to phai11ome11011} is called not a phm1tas111a, 
but a phantom or shadow-image (eido/011, 601 b). Phamasma is 
again used in the general sense of "appearance" or "what ap-
pears" at Parmenides l 66 a 4: "There is no doxa of what is not 
among the others, nor any pha11tasma." Further on in this pas-
sage, doxa is to doxazetai as phantasma is to phainetai, and the 
same point that is made in the phantasma passage is recapitulated 
at 166 b 6-7 using phai110111e11a and phai11etai. The dose connec-
tion with phainetai is evident also in Theaetatus l 5 2 b-c, one of 
the earliest uses of the word pha11tasia: "Is this 'it appears' 
('phai11etai') perceiving? ... Then pha1Jtasi,1 and perception 
arc the same in the case of that which is warm and everything 
of that sort." And in the Sophist (235 d 6 ff.) the contrast be-
tween the eikastike tee/me, which makes an accurate Ii keness, 
and the phantastike, which makes what seems to the deficient 
observer to be an accurate Ii kcncss, depends not on any theory 
36 For two Platonic passages, cf. infra and p. 244. I ha,-c chosen not ro dis-
cuss the more theoretical elaboration at Soph. 264 b since ir would require 
lengthy discussion and seems less useful in determining the ordinary usage 
of the word-group. Plato's theory is gi\'en an interesting discussion 111 
Lycos's "Aristotle and Plato on 'Appearing'." 
37 This is rhc usual practice of the commentators cited in n. 2 abon.·. 
242 


=== PAGE 33 ===
INTERPRETIVE ESSAYS 
of imaging, but on a general interest in how things appear; 
phamasma is, once again, the noun associated with phainetai 
(236 b 4 ff.) : 
v\1hat shall we call that which appears, because it is seen 
from a bad angle, to be like the beautiful, but which would 
not be likely even to resemble what it claims to be like, if 
,,·c could sec things of that size adequately? Since it appears 
(phainetlli), but is not like (eoike d'ou), shall we not call it a 
phantasmal 
The eikon, or likeness, is contrasted implicitly with the plum-
tasma, which creates a certain impression, but is not really simi-
lar. The verb phallf,1zesth,1i is used in a sense roughly equivalent 
to the simple ph1im·ti1i at Philebus 38 c 12 ("\,\'hat is this thing 
that appears (pht11Jt,1zumeno11), standing beside the rock under a 
tree?"). And at Symposium 211 a 5 ff., it is used to describe 
non-sensory, as well as sensory, appearing: 
The beautiful will appear to him (phantasthesetai) not as a face, 
or hands, appear, or anything else that partakes in body, nor 
as an argument appears, or a piece of knowledge, ... but 
itself by itself, eternally unitary in form. 38 
In much of the pre-Aristotelian evidence, then, pha11tasma, 
phamazesthai, and the new word phamasia arc used simply as 
38 It is true that the form is described as something "seen" earlier in the 
passage (k.itopsetai, 210 e •O, so the use of ph,mtazrsthai with the form would 
not by itself show it is non-sensory. But there is here an explicit contrast 
with the way perct:ptihlc objects "appear," c,·cn with the way an argu-
ment or some scienritic knowledge "appears" (and here ph,mtazesthai must 
surely be non-sensory). I would sec the sentence as a warning against 
inferring from the metaphorical use of k,1topset,1i abo\'e that the form is 
really apprehended by some quasi-sensory process. Zcph Stewart has 
suggested to me that ph,mt,1zestl1i1i is probably used in this and the Phi/rl,us 
passage to a\·oi<l any ambiguity as to whether the presentation is a delusion 
("seems to be under the tree, but isn't," "seems to be beautiful, but isn't"); 
the \'erb emphasizes the reliability of the prescnrntion. 
243 


=== PAGE 34 ===
ARISTOTLE'S DE .\IOTU ASI.\IAUU.\I 
relatives of phainetai: their presence docs not imply that any 
theory of imaging, or indeed any other particular theory, is in 
question. There arc, however, other passages where a more 
specific interest in imagining and dreaming is evident. Hippias 
Major (300 c) and Plzilebus (5 l a) use phantazestlwi of imagining, 
though without indicating a particular interest in images; and 
numerous passages use phamasma, or phmtazesth1i, to speak of 
apparitions (e.g., Aes. Af{. I 500; Pl. Phd. 81 d, Rep. 380 d, 
382 c-thc earliest known use of phant,Hia), and particularly 
dream-appearances (Acs. Septem 710, fr. 312; Eur. Hee. 54, 
94, 390; Hdt. 4.124; PI. Soph. 266). Pha11t,1sma, in such passages, 
need not designate a representative image, but it is easy to sec 
that a popular theory about these occurrences might take some 
such form. On the other hand, ph111t,1sm,1 has not been appro-
priated as the primary technical term to describe such phe-
nomena. For example, the decaying-sense account of memory 
in Philebus 34 a-b makes no use of phantasia or its cognates, 
relying instead on words such as kinesis and siiteri,1 aistheseos to 
describe the memory trace. 
In general we can say that while words that mean "appear-
ing" and "what appears" tend to be useful in an ordinary dis-
cussion of dreams and hallucinations, and while the context may 
in some of these cases indicate that the author believes that 
\vhat appears or is presented is an image, it is equally common to 
find different analyses of the mattcr-e.g., in Rep. 380 d, where 
we arc told not that an image of the god appears, but that the 
god himself appears in a changed form. Furthermore, in no 
case should we assume that phantasma uu·,ms "image." Its 
meaning is "what appears," and context must determine its 
usage. Even if it were established that the vast majority of 
English-speakers believe we think by means of images, that 
would hardly show that English "think" 11u·,1m anything like 
"have an image." I think it will emerge that Aristotle, though 
he goes further than his predecessor towards investing these 
words with a specific technical sense, bases his investigations 
on the connection with phaiuetai. 
Often when Aristotle uses phantasia and related words, the 
244 


=== PAGE 35 ===
INTERPRETIVE ESSAYS 
context makes no reference to imaging, and the words serve in 
a very general way to indicate Aristotle's interest in the way 
a scene looks to the living creature, what his awareness of it 
is, what he perceives it as. The following passages indicate 
how closely ph111t,1si,1 remains linked to phainetai, even in what, 
in the last example, seems to be a "technical" context: 
EN 1114a32tf.: All men strive for the apparent good (phaino-
111e11011 agatlzon): but no one is in control of the appearing 
(pham,zsia): the way the end appears (ph1i11etai) to someone 
depends on what sort of a man he is. 
EE l 235b25-29: Pleasure is desired, for it is an apparent 
good (phainomenon ,1gatho11). Some believe it is good; but 
to some it appears (phainetai) good, even if they do not 
believe it to be so-for ph,111t,1sitz and do.m are not in the 
same part of the soul. 
lnsonm. 460h 19 : The sun appears (phainetai) a foot wide; 
but often something else opposes this pha11tasia. 39 
All these passages discuss the various ways something may ap-
pear to, or be interpreted by, a living creature. The second and 
third make an additional contrast between the way the thing 
appears to the agent and the belief he has about it. A phantasia 
would seem to be a single, isolated impression, in contrast to 
doxa, which is based on experience and reflection. Thus E.N VII 
(II 47b4 ff.) draws a contrast between following the phantasia 
of particulars and following a general belief. The Inso11111. pas-
sage, though characteristically interpreted with reference to 
images, is quite comprehensible without them; it seems very 
similar to the EE statement. In both cases something in the 
world may appear a certain way to a creature, even while he 
holds an opposing belief about its nature. 
Once again, at the opening of the DA, Aristotle uses phantasi,1 
in an unmistakeably broad sense: 
39 Cf. Bonitz Index, sx. ph,mt,uiit for a number of similar passages. 
245 
_J 


=== PAGE 36 ===
ARISTOTLE'S DE i'HOTV ANIMAL/UM 
When we are able to give an account of the incidental 
attributes as they appear to us (kata ten phantasian), . . . 
then we will also be best qualified to speak about the ousia 
(4Q2h22-24). 
There is no obvious reason to separate such passages from 
others, as does Bonitz, finding different "senses" in question. 
Phantasia for Aristotle seems to be as wide-ranging a notion 
as the notion of the phainomena-which, as Owen has argued, 
embraces far more than the data of perception. 40 His interest 
is in how an object or state of affairs registers with the creature, 
what content it has for him. 41 If this is so, we will expect that 
for Aristotle to talk of a sensory phantasia would be to ascribe 
some (potentially motivating) content to the animal's percep-
tion, and that the animal who "phantasizes" will not just per-
ceive an object, but perceive it as a thing of a certain sort, a 
thing that could become for him an object either of pursuit or 
of avoidance. Like Wittgenstein, he would be interested in the 
experience of "seeing as," though, unlike Wittgenstein, who 
speaks of an "echo of thought in sight," 42 Aristotle seems to be 
concerned with the way in which all moving creatures, most 
of whom lack thought and experience, become a ware of objects 
in such a way as to be moved. The role of pha11tasia in the AJA 
and in DA 111.9-11 could, it seems, be explained with refer-
ence only to this very general interest in appearing, without 
importing images. To decide whether this sort of interpretation 
is correct will require the scrutiny of further evidence. But 
first we must assess the image theory itself. 
One might grant that the notion of "seeing as" is basic to 
Aristotle's interest in phantasia and still claim that, as he devel-
ops a theory based on this notion to explain various epistemo-
logical problems, he immediately imports images, so that there 
•o Owen, "Tithenai." 
41 He seems to be animated by many of the same concerns as, for exam-
ple, Dennett (Content) in his talk of the way in which a creature is aware 
of an object-cf. especially chapter IV. 
OWittgenstein, Pl, II.xi. 
246 


=== PAGE 37 ===
INTERPRETIVE ESSAYS 
are no passages in which he works out his basic insight about 
awareness in an equally flexible and interesting way. His 
analysis of the problems of delusion, dreaming, and memory 
cannot be analyzed here in any detail, but a few examples will 
show that in some of these contexts it requires distortion to 
find images at all, while in obvious image-contexts phantasia 
and its cognates arc not the words most commonly used. Aris-
totle's interest in the "truth" and "falsehood" of appearances, 
often said to be linked to a dogmatic image theory, is evident 
in passages where images arc not in question, in general talk 
about the way a state of affairs or a person is typically seen by 
others: 
Atfetapli. V .29, JOHhH-26: Things are called false either 
because they themselves arc not or because the plza11tasia 
that results from them is of what is not. 
Shadow-pictures (skiagmphia) and dream-images (e11up11ia)-
thc examples that follow-arc distinguished from the plza11tasia 
that results from them. Phwtasia me 011!0s should be taken not 
as "a dream image of what is not" (he is speaking of all dreams, 
not just dreams about non-existent things or situations), but as 
the false impression that results from the dream. '''hatever 
these enupnia arc-images, physical states, etc.-the point is 
that they give us a false impression of reality. "They are some-
thing," says Aristotle (10241>23), "but not what they give the 
impression of being (lion empoiei ten phmtasian)," not what we 
sec them as. \Ve take the shadow picture for an animal, a 
dream situation for a real one. 
Even clearer is 1025 115 ff. A man, Aristotle observes, can be 
called "false" if he often gives others a false impression, "just 
as we call states of affairs false if they create a false pha11tasia." 
To read mental pictures into this passage we would have to 
say that what a hypocrite docs (for the context indicates that 
hypocrisy, and not susceptibility to being misunderstood, is in 
question) is to paint in others' minds a picture of a smiling 
Dorian Gray, while all the while he is really terribly ugly 
from vice. Certainly Aristotle could not have believed that the 
247 


=== PAGE 38 ===
i 
ARISTOTLE'S DE .\IOTU A1.VI.\IAUU.\I 
moral qualities of a man standardly present themselves in a 
pictorial form and that to appraise someone's character falsely 
is to be shown picture X for picture Y. (And how could the 
decaying-sense account of the PX even explain the production 
of this misleading picture by the hypocrite?) The phamasia is 
just our interpretation of the data presented to us. It is an 
activity that may go wrong, and a clever hypocrite can delude 
us in words and deeds, so that he appears to us to be what he is 
not. 43 But no simple mechanism of images or traces in the soul 
can explain all the complex range of phenomena Aristotle 
studies under the rubric of plumtasia. 44 
In a number of other passages where plza111,1si.1 is invoked to 
explain delusion and dreaming, images arc not precluded, but 
the context makes it unlikely that they arc in question. Such is 
the passage already cited from the /usom11., paralleled by DA 
428h2-4: 
Things can also have a false appearance (phainetai pseude), 
concerning which we have a true opinion: e.g., the sun 
appears (phainetai) a foot wide, but we arc convinced it 
is larger than the inhabited world. 
To say the sun appears a foot across is not to claim that when 
we look at the sun we must have before us a mental picture that 
43 Strictly Aristotle ought to have said not that the phmt,1si,1 is false, but 
that the information it presents (which can be expressed propositionally) 
is false. Some people may "phantasize" propositionally, bur surely many 
will not. Aristotle often uses "false" in the loose sense of "inaccurate"-
hut strictly he denies truth-\·alue to the non-composite (e.g., ,\let,1ph. 
1051"17 ff., DA 430 1126 ff.). 
44 The Rhet. cites a number of similar examples where ph,mtasi,1 must 
mean, generally, "appearance" or "impression." For example, at 13 70"32, 
"Victory is pleasant . . . because one has the impression (phant,1Sia) of 
supcriority"-one secs oneself as superior. At I 3 71 "19: "Bcing-lm·ed is 
pleasant because one gets the impression (ph,111tasit1) one is really a good 
sort of person (tou hup,1rchei11 autiii to af!,,1thon einai)." Although Aristotle 
himself in this popular and probably early work in\'okes decaying sense 
to explain what phant11sia is ( I 3 70 1128), that accounr docs not fit his own 
usage of rhe word in these passages. 
248 


=== PAGE 39 ===
INTERPRETIVE F..SSA YS 
is a foot \\'ide----or even a picture that we somehow internally 
measure and find to be a foot wide. There is no evidence that 
Aristotle \\'anted to make such an unilluminating claim. The 
person's ph111t,1si,1 has as its object the sun itself, and plumtasia 
is his activity of seeing it as an object of a certain size. Judgment 
also has the real sun for its object, but, unlike phamasia, it 
requires experience and induction. It would be hard to find in 
this passage even the notion that the activity of pht111tasia neces-
sarily involves episodes of picturing. All that need be added to 
the basic sense-experience is some interpretation of what is seen. 
¼'hen Aristotle attempts to give a detailed explanation of 
memory and dreaming, he docs indeed invoke images. Memory 
and dreaming arc explained not as special sorts of awareness 
of an actual object or state of affairs, but as the having of an 
image that is like something in the world and (in the case of 
memory) is regarded as a likeness. Though images might be 
invoked to explain these phenomena quite independently of any 
physiological theory concerning their production, Aristotle 
invokes images only in connection with the working out of his 
physiological theory of decaying sense; and it seems to be the 
exigencies of this theory, rather than any aspect of his psy-
chological doctrine, that lead him to postulate these images. 
Actual perception sets up certain motions (ki11eseis) in the 
living creature, \\'hich persist in the absence of the object (DA 
111.3, 429 11 1-2, on which cf. p. 251). Similar ki11eseis, in connec-
tion with the theory of dreaming, arc likened to cloud forms 
that look now like men, now like centaurs. Each is said to be 
the residual trace of an actual aisthe1J1t1; the image resembles 
Coriscus, although it is not Coriscus (Inso11111. 461 bz9 ff.). Even 
more clearly, the theory of memory stresses that the kinesis 
acts like a signet-ring, making an impression of the aisthema. 
It is important to note that, although the definition of memory at 
A{ em. 4 5 In I 5-16 uses the word plwzt,1s1m1 to designate the 
memory-image (so that it seems to correspond to the "painting" 
(zop;raphem,1) of 450a29-30), the two expository passages just 
cited use neither pht11Jt,1si,1 nor phantasma. It is with reference to 
aisthemat,1, not ph111t,1S11111ta, that he discusses perceptual after-
249 


=== PAGE 40 ===
ARISTOTLE'S DR ,\IOTU ANI.\IAUU.\I 
images (46Qh2-3). To say the ph111t,1sm,1 is had as a likeness 
(45In15) is to suggest that pht111tasm,1t,1 arc not always like-
nesses. And elsewhere in the PX, a more general use of the 
words is attested (e.g., 460"16-18, where phmtasia explains 
actual perceptual mistakes, and A/em. 449"30 ff., which re-
affirms the sweeping claims of DA III. 7-8) .45 Aristotle, in the 
PN, advances the theoretical claim that phmtasia works, in at 
least some cases, by means of images: that a plza11tasmt1 can be 
like a picture. But he hardly seems to be giving "image" as the 
meaning of phall!asma, any more than an empiricist might be 
said to use "think" with the meaning "have an image." No 
theoretical weight attaches to the word itself, and context must 
determine its usage. 
If Aristotle's theory of memory here docs depend rather 
heavily on resemblance as criterion of symbolization, it still 
may not fully amount to the image-theory as I have described 
it. (I) The assimilation of memory to picture-seeing may be 
metaphorical, at least in part: for 450"25 ff. states that the 
"image," regarded in isolation from what it denotes, is either 
a theorema or a phamasma; the former is most unlikely to be 
pictorial. At 45 I a I, a thought (11oema) is contrasted with a 
m11emo11euma-a thought regarded as a likeness. Aristotle seems 
to admit here that memory may not always work through 
quasi-pictures, but might consist in regarding a non-pictorial 
thought as referring to something in the past. (2) There is, 
in any case, no implication that the image has the informational 
density of a picture, or that, in addition to what we initially 
"sec" in it, we can keep on going back to find new information. 
Nor is anything implied about the definiteness of the image. 
45 Cf. also the obscure passage in the /nsrm111. (458"15 ff.) in which 
Aristotle uses the word pha11t,1sma to refer to a thought or en\'isaging 
occurring to the agent in sleep o,·er and abo\'e rhc represcnrari,·e drcam-
irnage. This ruight be a further image. but the suggestion is that this 
phantasm,1, unlike the dream-impress, which resembles something in the 
world and is due to the interaction of external forces ·with the animal's 
physiolo~~• results ~rom the animal's acti\·c thinking and interpreting. I~ a 
picture, 1t 1s one he 1s engaged in painting, rather than one presented ro him 
for contemplation. 
250 


=== PAGE 41 ===
INTERPRETIVE ESSAYS 
And there is evidence that Aristotle found even this degree of 
reliance on imaging unsatisfactory. In the AJA, almost cer-
tainly later than the . \fem., he refers briefly to a theory of 
memory that docs not seem to introduce images at all. The 
objects of memory arc the pleasant and painful things in the 
world, and memory is an awareness of these things as shadows 
(eidola), 46 i.e., as no longer extant. If this is a conscious revision 
of his earlier theory, it is an interesting one, along the very 
lines suggested by some modern criticism of image-theories: 
imagining, memory, etc:., arc to be described not as the aware-
ness of pictures of things, but as a special sort of awareness of 
the things themselves: an awareness shaped by the passage of 
time and by various current aims and projects of the agent. 
It is, however, more disturbing to find a decaying-sense ac-
count of phantasi,1 in the D.4 itself. For I II. 3 is usually taken 
to be the canonical account of pha11t,1si,1, the one place in which 
Aristotle expounds his theory of what phant,1sia is, and with 
reference to which alone we must interpret any passage in 
which the word occurs. After his attempt to distinguish ph,m-
tasia from other cognitive faculties, Aristotle appends a discus-
sion that explains delusion by false appearances, using a thcor\' 
of m~tions (kineseis) set up by actual perception, tl;at rcmai~1 
even rn_thc absence of the object and arc "similar" to the actual 
~er~epnons (42~h H, 4_29n5). The talk of similaritv seems to 
md1catc t~at A_nstotlc 1s thinking of rcsL·mbling im~gcs of the 
sort descnbcd m the passages cited from th, py 1{ 
that the final paragraph of I I I ~ 
, 
. , 
\ c. 
... . ' we grant 
. 
. 
•· n:pn:scnrs ~~nstotlc s canonical 
d1scuss1on of pha11t,1si,1, we will be forced to fi·11d . 
. 
h 
images 1 n manv 
passages\\: c_rc t~c. contcxt_alonc would not indicate their prcs·-
en~c._ But It Is difficult to lllterprct II 1.3 as a coherent whole 
bmldmg up to the dccaying-scnsL' discussion as ro a l.kfinitivc 
summary. Much has been said earlier in the discussion that 
docs not fit with such a narrow theory. The contrast bctwc<.·11 
phantasia and dox,1 i nvokcd plwnt,1s i,1 to cxplai n error in the 
presence of the object. The sun-example, as we saw, makes 
46 ,\fA 7021\5; cf. note on this line; and also my rcvic.:w of Louis. 
251 


=== PAGE 42 ===
AR/STOTT.ES DI: .\IOTL' A.\"l.\1.4/./C.\I 
poor sense if we suppose :\ristorlc to be explaining the fact 
that the sun looks a foor long by referring to a foot-long picture 
or bodily impress. Again, phmt,ui,1, in contrast to belief, was 
said to be "in our power'' (4-27hl 7 ff.). Herc the range of the 
ph111t,1si,1-cases in question is some\\'hat restricted (not all ap-
pearing, clearly, is "in our po\\'cr"), but not as it is restricted 
in the decaying-sense passages: rhc: p/J.111t,1Si,1 in question here 
is active conjuring, envisaging, not rhc: rc:lic of pc:rccptual change. 
At 428n J 4 ff., ph11Jt,1si,1 is usc:d to cxplai n the unclear percep-
tion of an actual object, as wdl as the after-images that appear 
to people with their eyes closc:d. :\ risrotle in 111. 3, as elsewhere, 
directs his attention to a wide variety of phenomena under the 
rubric of ph111t,1sia, phenomena that he doL'S nor al\\'ays clearly 
distinguish. The decaying-sense analysis at the chapter's end 
docs not fir the entire discussion. The best course for the inter-
preter seems to be not ro try to rL·ad inconsistencies away, or 
to try to make everything tit \\'ith what seems the most tech-
nical passage, but to allm,· :\ ristotdian plw1t,1Si,1 the broad scope 
hc.:rc.: that it evidcntlv has dse\,·here and recognize the diversity 
of the phenomena i ;1 question. Out of a very general concern 
with appearing and a\,·arc:ncss, Aristotle dcvcl~ps theories to 
account for a numbc:r of di ff crcnt occurrences_; 111 all but a few 
the connection \\'ith the original interest rcmams ~trong. 
But a furthl'r problem remains in 111.L lntroduc~ng t!1c whole 
account, and ditticult to sec as a slip or an ahcrrarion, 1s the re-
mark (-l2Hal- 4): 
ff ph111t,ui,1 is that in vi rrue of \\·hich some phall!dSlll,l 
comes-to-be for us, and not what \\'<.' call phmt,1sia using 
a transferred sense 0•,1t,1 mtt,1plwr,111), it is one of those 
capacities or dispositions in virtue of \\'hich we make 
distinctions, and tell truth or falsehood. 
A ristotlc is somc:ho\\' restricting the use of ph111t,1Si,1, ruling out 
the "transferred" use .. \lost commentators have taken this to 
be a bracketing of the general usc:s conncctc:d with pht1i11eti1i, 
and a limiting to thc: cases \\'here the creature has a mental 
image. This seems suspect for several reasons: 
252 


=== PAGE 43 ===
INTERPRETIVE ESSAYS 
(I) There is no good reason to suppose pha11tas111a must mean 
"pictorial image" in this or any passage. 
(2) In the ensuing discussion and in other "technical" con-
texts, Aristotle uses what on this view (which separates image-
passages from passages that emphasize the connection with 
phainetai without reference to images) would be the ruled-out 
sense. He plays on the connection with phainetai at, e.g., 428
87, 
14, h2-3 and passages already cited from the lnsrmm. 
(3) It is odd, and at variance with Aristotle's usual proce-
dure, to speak of a word's basic and central ordinary use as 
being kata met,1plzori111. He uses this expression precisely and 
consistently throughout his work to designate a transfer or ex-
tension of a term to an area where it does not strictly apply-a 
conscious shift away from the basic ordinary usage. (It often 
indicates a shift of realm away from the one in which the 
predicate strictly applies, but may also indicate an extension to 
members of the same realm that cannot be truly denoted by the 
predicate used literally.) Examples arc: the use of oxu ("sharp") 
and baru ("heavy") of musical pitch (DA 4208 29), the use of 
dunamis ("power") as a technical term in mathematics (Metaph. 
IOJ9h33)', the use of andreios ("courageous") to refer to a man 
who is not truly courageous, but only has some characteristics 
in common with the courageous man (EN 1115 8 15).47 The 
first two involve a shift of realm, the third a deliberate extension 
in virtue of a resemblance. The same form of words used in the 
present passage occurs also in the HA, where Aristotle asserts 
that all horned animals arc four-footed, "except any which are 
said kata metaphomu, and by a figure of speech, to have horns" 
(5008 3). This is further explained at PA 662h25: "And there 
arc others that arc said to have horns in virtue of some simi-
larity and kat,1 meti1phor.m: but none of these can perform the 
function of a horn." In no other Aristotelian passage is the 
basic use of a word in ordinary language designated as kata 
met,1phom11 in contrast to a newly introduced technical sense. 
There is, in fact, a usage of phmtasi,1 that would much more 
47 Cf. also .\le1i1ph. 1015 11 I I, l0l9h33, 10211i2s. 1024°6; EE 1221"30, 
I 23Ja3 J. 
253 


=== PAGE 44 ===
ARISTOTLE'S DE .HOTU AN/MAUU.\I 
plausibly be described as a transferred sense, and that has no 
connection with the occurrence of phantasmata. As Freudenthal 
correctly obscrved, 48 phantasia by Aristotle's time had acquired 
the transferred meaning, "(mere) show, pomp, ostentatious-
ness." This use makes its first appearance (the word being 
phantazesthai) in Herodotus (Vll.10.5), is frequent by the time 
of Polybius, and appears at least once in Aristotle, in the popular 
style of the Rhetoric (1404nll): "But all these (sc. points of 
diction) arc phantasia, and aimed at the audience." This passage, 
unnoticed by Freudenthal, strengthens his case. The use of 
phantasia to mean "mere show" can, unlike the uses connected 
with phainetai that form the basis of the word's semantic devel-
opment, accurately be described as katt1 met,1phora11; and, unlike 
the basic use, it involves no reference to phamasmata, in however 
general a sense. Aristotle is precise about linguistic relation-
ships. If he had meant, "and not as the many use it," or "and 
not in its non-scientific sense," he might easily have said so. 
Instead he seems to be saying, "Assuming when we say 
phantasia we mean the faculty in virtue of which we are ap-
peared to in such-and-such a ,vay, and arc not using the trans-
ferred sense according to which it means (mere) show, then it 
can be said that in virtue of phantasia we tell truth or falsehood-
whereas to say, 'in virtue of ostentatiousness we tell truth or 
falsehood' would be silly." It will be objected that this is a 
trivial point. But for Aristotle it is never trivial to recognize 
all the senses of a word and to indicate carefully those with 
which he wiII be concerned. And there is, after all, no reason 
in the context for us to sec this as a major theoretical statement. 
It has been inflated into one because of the interpretation 
standardly given it. It can just as well be seen as a parenthetical 
aside, similar to that in the HA passage cited above. It need 
not lead us to form any other view concerning Aristotle's 
interests and projects than that suggested by the evidence in 
general. The passage has probably been interpreted as it has 
only because commentators, holding to the image view, had 
48 Freudenthal, 30. 
254 


=== PAGE 45 ===
INTERPRETIVE F..SSA YS 
already decided that the uses connected directly with phai11ttai 
represented one sense, the "image" uses another. 
In numerous contexts, then, in which he is analyzing prob-
lems of delusion, dreaming, and memory, Aristotle speaks of 
phantasia and plw1t,1sm,1t,1. But the evidence indicates that his 
basic interest is in how things in the world appear to living 
creatures, what the creatures sec their objects as. Sometimes he 
docs speak of decaying-sense images that are like that which 
they represent. Occasionally these arc characterized as ph,m-
tasmata. But the evidence offers us no license for reading images 
into every passage, nor docs the image view seem to be of such 
central imp~rtancc to Aristotle that it robs his general observa-
tions of their broad i ntcrcst. \\re do not need to assume that the 
role of phamasia in action and thinking must be explained by 
reading in images. \Ve will find, in fact, that a more plausible 
and interesting account can be produced without them. 
PIIANTASZA. AND ArsTIIEsrs 
The limitations of Aristotle's decaying-sense doctrine as a key 
·to explaining all phamasia contexts become particularly ap-
parent when we turn to the difficult problems concerning the 
connection of pha11t,1sia with aisthesis. We saw that the state-
ment that phamasia and aisthesis were one, but different in einai, 
was best understood as a claim that these were two aspects to 
be discerned in many perceptual activities, and not that there 
were some activities of the perceptual capacity that should be 
called phamasia, other quite separate activities that should be 
called aisthesis. It would not be sufficient, then, to see phantasia 
as everywhere picking out a process of decaying sense in the 
absence of actual perception. The theory of action in both the 
MA and the DA strongly claims that even when aisthesis is 
going on, phantasia must also be mentioned in the explanation. 
The use of phantasia in action-contexts, and its broad connection 
with phainetai throughout Aristotle, suggested to us that phan-
tasia is the faculty in virtue of which the animal sees his object 
as an object of a certain sort, so that we can say the perception 
255 


=== PAGE 46 ===
ARISTOTLE'S DE ,lWTU A,.VJ.\IAUU.\I 
has for him some potentially motivating content. 49 In order to 
be convincing, this hypothesis must be developed in more 
detail against the background of Aristotle's theory of aisthesis. 
We must discover why, according to this theory, aisthesis is, 
by itself, insufficient to present the object in such a way that 
the animal is moved to act-why, instead, it must, in the AJA 
terminology, "prepare" a phamasia which, in turn, "prepares" 
the desire. 
The first place to which we would obviously turn for some 
help with these problems is the section of I I I. 3 that contrasts 
phantasia with aisthesis. We must, hO\vever, be cautious in our 
use of these passages to explain those dealing with action: for 
Aristotle seems here to be thinking primarily of pha11tasia in the 
absence of the perceptible object. The statement that aisthesis 
but not phantasia, is always going on (428 6 8-9) might mean 
that we arc always receiving various stimuli, but not always 
attending to them or perceiving them as anything in particular; 
but it might also be taken to indicate that we have phantasia 
only when the object is not present. (Note, however, that if 
this second reading is correct we will have the problem of ex-
plaining why Aristotle should say aisthesis goes on even in the 
object's absence.) The statement that aisthesis is always accu-
rate, but phantasia can be false ( 4 2 8 ° I 1-1 2) is mo re clearly 
helpful in that it emphasizes the mechanical, reproductive side 
of aisthesis in Aristotle's theory; this will prove the key to 
understanding the large role he gives phm1tasia. The statement 
that, in contrast to doxa, phantasia is in our power ( 427h I 9-20} 
might be interpreted to be about conjuring and imagining alone; 
but it might have a broader scope and resemble Wittgenstein's 
"Seeing an aspect and imagining arc subject to the will." 60 
A more clearly revealing distinction is the contrast drawn 
in the MA between the physicalist explanations we should 
provide for phantasia and for aisthesis. Aisthesis just is a bodily 
alteration under a different description; 61 Aristotle feels con-
49 Cf. Dennett, chapters IV, VI. 
50 Wittgenstein, Pl, II.xi, p. 213. 
51 Cf. 424
1117, 425h27, 426 1116, 427 3 3, 431 1114, 19, 432"1. 
256 


=== PAGE 47 ===
INTERPRETIVE ESSAYS 
fidenr that he can pick out the physiological alloioseis that are 
its matter. He goes on to infer from the fact that phantasia 
alone, in the absence of the object, can result in motion that 
pliantasia, too, is accompanied of necessity by some bodily 
change (70lhl7-21, cf. p. 238). But the nature of the alteration 
is much less evident. Ph111tasi,1, or thought accompanied by 
phantasia, works by presenting the animal with the form or 
essence of its object, which has an effect like that of the object 
itself (70ihI9 ff., 7031>19 ff.). The forms presented by phamasi,1 
were called the forms "of the pleasant or painful" (70lh21), 
or, equivalently, "of that which produces the affections" 
(703hI 9-20). These remarks seem to imply that whereas in 
aisthesis the animal becomes just like the object, when phm1tasia 
is operative he becomes aware of the object as a thing of a 
certain so rt. 52 
So far the evidence indicates that pha11t,1si,1 is a special kind of 
awareness of a perceptible object. But why is this special kind 
of awareness important? Our initial examination of some at-
tempts to distinguish it from aisthesis proper indicates that it is 
because of the passive character of Aristotelian aisthesis that 
a further faculty is required to explain the agent's selective 
r,2 The puzzling statement that ph.111t,1s,11ata arc like aistliem11ta, only 
"without matter" (DA 432B9-10) might also be taken to emphasize the 
active role of the phanrasizing agent by stressing that, whereas in aistliesis 
there arc ob\·ious material changes-a kind of "impress" of the object-
in phantasia this is not the case. The context suggests that this passage 
could just as well be taken to mean, "a ph1111tasm,i is like an aistliema, bur 
one that can come about when the object is not physically present." But 
our interpretation dcri\·es some support from the similar language of 
4z91>zo ff., where reason is said to judge "as things are separate from 
matter" (hoI chorist,1 ta pmgm,1ta trs hu/es)-mcaning it judges forms, not 
particulars. \Vhilc aisthlsis recd\'cs the impress of a particular object, 
phantasia im·olves seeing its form, i.e., seeing it as an F, as a thing belonging 
to a certain class of objects and not just as a particular materially distinct 
item. We could not, of course, really want to confine the operations of 
phantasia to the level of species or genus. This man can appear to me as 
Socrates, not just as a man. Bur to decide whether Aristotle's metaphysics 
and his theory of action really pull him in rwo different directions on this 
point would require a full analysis of .Hetaph. VII-VIII. 
257 


=== PAGE 48 ===
ARISTOTLE'S DE MOTU ANI.\IAUL'.\I 
fastening on certain aspects of his environment. There is evi-
dence that Aristotle did not always give aisthesis such a passive 
role; some passages in DA 11.5, particularly, seem to ascribe 
to it a more active, interpretive function. 53 But the passive 
conception still remains central in the DA and the PN. I think 
it can be argued that it is because of the prevalence of the 
passive picture (necessary, in his view, ro explain perceptual 
accuracy), and because of his belief that the proper objects of 
the senses arc not things but their qualities, that Aristotle is 
forced to turn to plumtasia in a number of passages to explain 
the agent's selective interpreting of his environment. A key 
passage in developing this view is chapter I I .12 of the DA. 
Chapter 12 describes aisthesis as "what receives perceptible 
forms without the matter" (424nl8-19). It is compared to 
wax that receives the impress of a metal signet-ring without 
receiving the metal itself. (Below, the case of plants will be 
contrasted: they are only affected when they absorb as well 
the matter of what affects them--424n33 ff.). The impress is 
the aisthema, its matter (analogous to the wax) a physiological 
alteration. There is, when aisthesis occurs, a physiological 
change that is the direct impress of something in the \\·orld. The 
faculty seems here to play an entirely passive role, receiving, 
but not selecting. Aristotle has said that what aisthesis receives 
are forms (eide). Now, lest we be misled by this claim, he goes 
on to explain that "aisthesis is affected by the things that have 
color or taste or sound, but not insofar as they arc what each 
of them is spoken of as being, but insofar as they possess a 
certain quality, and in virtue of their relations to the sense in 
question." 54 Though translators differ in their renderings of 
crucial phrases here, 55 they seem to agree about the nature of 
63 I ha\·e been much helped in reading this chapter by a \·cry interesting 
unpublished paper by John Cooper, dcli\·ered at the Princeton Uni\·crsity 
Ancient Philosophy Conference, 197 3. 
64 4246 21 ff.: oµolws Of JtCXL 7/ at<TiJTJ<TLS EJta<T'TOV inro 'TOU EXOJl'TOS xpwµcx ij 
xvµov ij V!O'{'O'II 1raO'XEL, a>-.>-.. ovx ~ fl{Ol<T'TOP EJ(ElVWP AE'}'ETm, &XX. ii TOLOJJBl, 
uoci. JtcxTa ro11 M'Yov. Cf. also DA 430.,26-30. 
6s I follow Ross in understanding ki?i kata ton lo?,011 to refer to the pre-
viously discussed relations between each of the senses and its proper 
object. 
258 


=== PAGE 49 ===
INTERPRETIVE ESSAYS 
the contrast. As Hic:ks puts it, when we perceive a rose by 
sight, it is not the rose qu,1 rose, but the rose qua white that 
acts upon our sight. But to be moved to action an animal has to 
become aware of something qua what-it-is-called; he has to sec 
the man as a man, not just as pale. 56 The forms said to be pre-
sented by phmtasia were forms of the pleasant and the fearful, 
hence necessarily of the thing as a unitary object under some 
description, not just as an assortment of various perceptible 
characteristics. \\·c arc always passively receiving perceptual 
stimuli; but when \\'e actively focus on some object in our 
environment, separating it out from its context and seeing it as 
a certain thing, the faculty of phantasia, or the phm1tasi,1-aspect 
of aisthesis, is c:allcd into play. Aristotle is, admittedly, not 
entirely consistent. In some passages aisthesis plays a more 
active part; and ph111t,1Ji,1 is not always mentioned where we 
might expect. But it seems reasonable to suppose that it was in 
answer to the problems growing out of his precise delimitation 
of aisthesis in, e.g., DA 11.12 that Aristotle turned increasingly, 
in the DA's subsequent account of perception's role in action, 
to the faculty of phtmtasia. 57 
There is one more curious passage that, though obscure, 
seems to confirm our conclusions about the interpretive function 
of phamasia. In DA 11.8, 420h3 I ff., .Aristotle distinguishes 
voice from mere noise: 
But that which docs the striking must be a living creature, 
and must be with some phantasia; for voice is a noise that 
is indicative (sem,mtikos) of something. 
A speaker only means or conveys something (phone is, of 
66 It is, of course, c,1/lrd "white," as well as "rose"; but the substance-
term is, for Aristotle. the one under which we must pick it out before we 
can go on to say anything else about it. "The white thing" docs not pick 
out anything that we can confidently trace through time and rcidentify; 
"rose" docs. Cf. C1t. 5, .\let,1ph. \'II. I, 4, 5, etc.; Strawson, lndh·iduals, 
chapter V. (I). [7j. 2 (168 ff.) on "sorrnl" and "characterizing" uni-
versals; and W'iggins, /STC, especially 2i-40. 
57 One answer to problems of inconsistency is to suppose that aisthlsis, 
like phronejis (cf. n. 28 supra). is used in both a generic and a specific sense, 
and phantasi11, like politike, picks out a particular aspect of its acti,·ity. 
259 


=== PAGE 50 ===
ARISTOTU."S DE .\IOTL' ANI.\IAUC\I 
course, more general than logos) if he is exercising phmtasia. 
Hicks, predictably, interprets, "It is by the presence of the 
image that vocal sound is mainly differentiated from mere 
noise." 58 This reading is singularly uninformative. If Hicks 
means strictly a decaying-sense image, this is surely too con-
fining. We very often use voice in the presence of the per-
ceptible object. If he means some image that is produced along-
side the aisthema, but is distinct from it, neither he nor Aristotle 
shows us how to make the distinction.:, 9 It seems more plausible 
to sec Aristotle as saying simply that an animal's utterance 
conveys something only if it is about somcthing--i .c., only if 
the animal is aware of something in the world in virtue of the 
faculty of phallfasia. On this view voice is se111i1JJtikos of an ob-
ject or state of affairs to which the animal has dirccted his 
attention. On the image reading, it is sem,mtifos not of an ob-
ject, but of the mental picture; this seems to be a bizarre claim, 
for which it would be difficult to find either textual or philo-
sophical backing. 60 
The theory of pha11t,1si,1, then, helps Aristotle to account for 
the interpretive side of perception; and it docs more. The claim 
68 Hicks, in his note on this passage. 
69 Hicks's conclusion that we require an image c,·cn in the presence oJ 
the object suggests the following suspicious line of thought: psychic 
processes must always h,l\'c an object. If the actual object is absent (as in 
many cases of ph,111tasi,1) we must supply an internal object. Bur since Aris-
totle must ha\·e had a unitary theory of p/J,111t,1si,1, we will h;n·e to say an 
image is present e,·cn in cases where the object itself is actually there. 
60 It is true that in /)/ chapter I Aristotle makes two claims: ( I) Vocal 
sounds arc sumbola of psychic affection. (2) These affcctions (p,1t/Je11111t,1) 
arc the same for all men and arc likenesses (/Jomoio111,1t,1) of ac.·cual states of 
affairs. Only the second claim is troublesome, since we would agree that 
phant11sia is a psychic pro<:ess and that wh<.:n ,·ocal sounds arc emitted that 
is a sign that somf psychic process is taking place. But this early work docs 
not make the important distinction between the role of ,1istlirsis and that of 
pha11t,1sia to which Aristotle is forced in the DA by considcrations such as 
we have outlined. So the talk of similarity may refer only to rhL' passi,·ity. 
of aisthesis and the status of the ,1ist/Je111t1 as "impress." And the: DA passage 
may well be a later correction in ,·iew of the theory of p/J,mt,ui,1: mere 
aisthesis, and the rcprcsc.·ntati,·c ,1ist/Jem,1, arc not enough. 
260 


=== PAGE 51 ===
l~TFRPRETl\'E ESSAYS 
that ,1isthesis and ph111t,1Si,1 arc "the same faculty" now amounts 
to the contention that reception and interpretation are not 
separable, but thoroughly interdependent. There is no receptive 
"innocent eye" in perception. How something phainetai to me 
is obviously bound up with my past, my prejudices, and my 
needs. But if it is only in virtue of ph111tasia, and not aisthesis 
alone, that I apprehend the object as an object, then it follows 
that there is no uninterpreted or "innocent" view of it, no dis-
tinction-at least on the level of form or object-perception-
bctween the given, or received, and the interpreted.61 Aisthesis 
still seems to present uninterpreted colors, sounds, etc.; to this 
extent Aristotle is still a believer in the given. But this theory 
of phwtasia (Ii kc his theory of the phainumen,1 in his philosophy 
of science) has taken him a long way in a more promising 
direction. 
P11.-1Nr.-1s1.-1 A-:,,;o ORE.Xis 
Phantasia, then, is the animal's awareness of some object or 
state of affairs, which may well prove to be an object of desire. 
It can serve both to present the object of desire initially and, 
later, to specify the object at hand as what is desired. This need 
not involve t\\'O steps, but often does. I am thirsty; I have (in 
the absence of the object) a phmt,1sia of drink. I then see a 
water fountain and direct my attention to it as drink. It is 
singled out from the conglomerate of my perceptions. It means 
something to me. I go and take a drink. Ph111tasi,1 can also be 
used to account for delusion in practical cases: "Poor dog, he 
saw that as water (or as drink) \\'hen it was really ammonia 
solution." The role of phmt,ui,1 here is, of course, the same as 
in the non-practical case (e.g., "He saw the sun as a foot wide"); 
the difference between the practical and the non-practical lies 
solely in the role played by desire. And in both cases the exer-
cise of an opposing judgment can prevent the agent from acting 
on the basis of ph111t,1si,1. In the case of non-linguistic creatures 
we will, as a rule, speak of phmt,1si,1 only in practical cases; we 
61 Cf. Goodman, I.A. 6- I 0, and The Structure nf Appear1111ce, 132 ff. 
261 


=== PAGE 52 ===
ARISTOTLE'S DE MOTU ANl.\fAUU.\l 
infer the content a perception has for them from the appropri-
ateness or inappropriateness of their response. It looked like 
drink to him, so he wanted it; but if he had seen it as what it 
was (p:)ison), he would have stayed where he \\·as, or run away. 
If we can guess at the creature's probable desires, we can infer 
from the behavior to the phm1tasia. 62 Bur I think it would be a 
mistake to conclude that phallfasia is best analyzed as a disposi-
tion, or a tendency to treat the object as an X. It is a psycho-
logical process, for which a physiological description is always 
theoretically available; if we knew the physiological description, 
we could potentially determine the phamasia even in cases where 
no desire, and, hence, no behavior followed. (Though I suspect 
that the identities would be token- and not type-, so we would 
in practice have a hard time doing this.) Thus phautasiai are 
not logically dependent on the resulting action and can be used 
to explain it. 63 
If phantasia is not opposed by judgment, and if the creature 
desires the object as presented by phantasitl, he will, then, act 
accordingly. In the case of animals, there will seldom be op-
position; they cannot weigh one plumtasia against another, de-
liberate about which to pursue, or even correct one with the 
aid of judgment, so they generally just follow whatever presents 
itself to them as suitable. 64 With human beings, as Aristotle 
explains in DA Ill. I I, the situation can be more complex. 
62 There is e\'idence that Aristotle believed ph,mtasi,1 alone, in a limited 
range of cases, is sufficient to cause a part of the creature to rnm·c without 
desire being opcrati\'e in any genuine sense-cf. chapter 11, and notes. 
63 On the implications of this for our understanding of the practical 
syllogism, cf. Essay 4. 
64 Cf. EN 1150.,28, 1147"4-5, and ,Het,1ph. 980"25-2.7, which denies that 
animals can acquire experience. DA 428n21-2 3 distinguishes ph,mtasia from 
doxa by claiming that the latter requires the additional clement of pistis, 
which other animals lack. (['istis is com·iction dependent on c.·xperience, 
relying on lof!,os as well as perception-cf. Pol. l 322n32,, I 326n26, Ph. 
262°18, EE 12 I 6h26, etc.) Aristotle's remarks on animal psychology look 
rather ca\·alier and unreflecti\·e; his theory of mori,·ation would olJ\"iously 
be more con\'incing if he had devoted more attention to problems of animal 
instinct, learning, habituation, and beha\·ioral responses. The collection of 
lore about animal beha,·ior in HA IX is a poor substitute for such an 
inquiry. 
262 


=== PAGE 53 ===
INTERPRETIVE ESSAYS 
There arc two types of ph111t,1sia, the deliberative (or calcula-
tive) and the perceptual (43 3h28}. Not every phantasia of a 
rational creature is a rational phantasitl, we must assume. (The 
perceptual is said to "belong to other animals as well'' (sc. as 
to humans}-433h29-30, cf. also 434°6.) But any that involve 
looking to the future, weighing one possible course of action 
against an0thcr, appear to be of this sort. The workings of 
delib~rativc plw1t,1Si,1 arc explained in the following way: 
For whether he \,·ill do this or this is already the job of 
reasoning. And he must measure using a single criterion; for 
he seeks the grearcr good. So he is able to make one 
pha11t,1sma out of many (4H0 7-10}. 
This is a very difficult passage for image-theorists to interpret. 
Ross ends up with a collage view of deliberation: the deliber-
ating man combines clements from the different pictures in his 
head, ending up with a single picture. 65 This, of course, already 
implies that the agent docs something more active than merely 
contemplating an image, and so is a bit nearer our view. But 
it seems an unfortunately crude and over-narrow picture of 
deliberation to ascribe to Aristotle, in that it implies (though 
whether or not Ross would accept the implication is unclear) 
that whatever criterion one selects (goodness, for example, as 
well as bigness or beauty) must be susceptible of pictorial 
representation. 
I would argue that the sense of the passage is, instead, the 
following: creatures with reason do not always, like animals, 
follow one pha11t,1sitz after another, sporadically and without an 
overall plan. Animals can act only according to the awareness 
of the moment. Human beings can, however, look to the future 
and to past experience, deliberating and weighing one "this" 
against another. They become aware of several possible courses, 
and arc able: 
(I) To sec the consequences of an action as following from 
that action-the two "appearings" being thought by reason as 
a unity. 
65 Cf. Ross•s commentary ,1d foe. 
263 


=== PAGE 54 ===
ARISTOTLE'S DF. MOTL' ANI.\IAUU.\I 
(2) To measure one set of consequences against another in 
terms of some criterion whose maximization is desired-thus 
relating the two sets of consequences and making a unified ap-
pearing. The discrete considerations, "This or that," become 
the unity, "This rather than that.'' 
The relation of the deliberative phmtasia to the practical syl-
logism would then be twofold: first, the sort of deliberation en-
visaged here could help to explain chains of reasoning, as in the 
"cloak" example in .HA 7: "I want X, but to have X I must 
get Y first," and so on. Second, having reasoned in chain fashion 
about different possible courses, a man can compare the out-
comes with a view to the good desired. Thus the man in /\IA 7 
who needs covering might consider several candidates for the 
minor premise, speculating on which would give him the degree 
of warmth he required. Other animals, too, employ the struc-
tures revealed in the 1\!A account of the syllogism, but only 
men have the phmuasian ek sullof!,ismou ("from infcrence"), 66 
and, in consequence, animals' desires have no results of de-
liberation to work with; the animal is ruled now by one desire 
(as the result of a particular activity of phantasia), now by 
another. 
So far the account of deliberative phantasiti has been inter-
preted without reference to images, even to episodes of visual-
izing. But it seems fair to concede at this point that Aristotle 
does, in DA 111.7 (431'>6-8), speak of cakulation about the fu-
ture as though it involved a kind of picturing: "When one calcu-
lates, using the phamasmata or 11oemata in the soul, as if one saw 
the things, and plans for the future in view of the present .... " 
The fact that noemata are included here alongside pha11tas111ata 
indicates that Aristotle is not committing himself to explaining 
all phantasia cases with reference to picture-like internal ob-
jects; but he may be saying here, and in II I. I I as well, that the 
activity of deliberative phantasia often can involve picturing, or 
at least some sort of envisaging. This is not an implausible 
thing to say. I have interpreted the passages speaking only of 
66 With Hicks, I rake this robe rhc natural construction of ten at 434n11. 
264 
I 
j 


=== PAGE 55 ===
INTERPRETIVE ESSAYS 
"appearing" in order to show that coherent sense can be made 
of them without invoking pictorial images, a sense that seems 
to tic them more closely to what I have argued is Aristotle's 
basic intuition in constructing a theory of awareness. 
p II A . .\" 7' .·l s I .-t 
A :,,.; D T HI N KI NG 
Aristotle insists in both DA 111.9 and i\fA 6-7 that think-
ing by itself is insufficient to lead to action. The object 
of thought must be present to the animal's awareness as an 
object of desire before he will move towards it. It is, as we 
argued, through ph111t,1si,1 that a perceptible object is seen as 
an object under a certain formal description. Only once pha11fasia 
has endowed the object of perception with a formal content can 
it become an object of pursuit or avoidance. This is what 
Aristotle seems to mean by saying that in the plumtasmata what 
is to be pursued or avoided is determined (horistai) for the 
creature (43Ih2). In DA 111.7 he takes the further step of in-
voking pl1t1ntt1si,1 to explain how we can be moved to action by 
thinking of a non-present object: the noctic faculty is said to 
be provided with the form of its object by phantasmata, which 
provide a starting-point for the operations of desire. Pham,uia 
ties abstract thought to concrete perceptible objects or situa-
tions, the form of which it presents to the noetic faculty. To 
use as an example the Rlut. passage (137Qb32) cited in note 44, 
one might say that victory is regarded as desirable because we 
have an awareness of being superior: our thought of victory is 
tied to the concrete impression of getting the better of some 
enemy, and it is such focussing on the concrete that gives 
thought its motivating po\\·cr. Desire never has a purely ab-
stract object. 
One further reason for introducing the phmztasma into the 
explanation of thinking was, we suggested, to maintain a con-
sistently physicalist picture of action. Aristotle does not wish 
to say that thought processes arc identical with, or even neces-
sarily accompanied by, any physiological change. But in living, 
sublunary creatures, every thought is accompanied by a quasi-
265 


=== PAGE 56 ===
ARISTOTLE'S DE MOTU ANI.\IAUUM 
sensory awareness of the form of the object, and this is neces-
sarily linked to some physiological change. This argument 
implies that in cases in which a judgment opposes a sensory 
phantasia, this judgment cannot lead to action unless it is accom-
panied by a further activity of plumtasi,1, hence a physiological 
change. 
We arrive here at the most difficult part of Aristotle's dis-
cussion of phantasia and noesis-his claim that phantasia is active 
every time we have any thought at all. Elsewhere he often 
emphasizes the importance of perceptual experience for the 
exercise of intellectual faculties. De Sensu I (432n2 ff.) claims 
that perception, which makes us aware of distinctions, is essen-
tial for practical wisdom (cf. also the opening of AJetaph. I 
and Sens. 445hJ6 ff.). In APo 1.18 (81°38 ff.), Aristotle argues 
that perception is essential both to induction and to demonstra-
tion, since induction proceeds from particulars and the first 
principles of demonstration arc arrived at by induction. But 
DA 111.8 claimed not only that the ability to perceive is a 
necessary condition for thinking in general (432n6-7), but also 
that all our thinking, theoretical as well as practical, is neces-
sarily accompanied by some activity of phamasia. 
Aristotle does not explain this blanket claim with any care; 
but \VC arc in a position to conjecture. There is no thinking 
(whether practical or theoretical) that is simply abstract; I 
cannot think of a pure proposition. For every thought there is 
some episode of symbolizing or envisaging that, as it were, 
provides a concrete vehicle for the thought. I do not simply 
think of the Principle of Non-Contradiction, in all its abstract 
purity. At the same time I am also somehow symbolizing it to 
myself, whether by imagining an example of it, or a logical 
formalization, or even by saying some words.67 Another point 
made by Aristotle in this regard (Mem. 449b3 I ff.) is that 
usually my symbolization will convey other strictly unneces-
sary information: I want to think about the mathematical 
abstraction, Triangle, and my thought is accompanied by the 
envisaging of a particular kind of triangle, having a certain size. 
67 Cf. some useful remarks by Price, p. 139. 
266 


=== PAGE 57 ===
INTERPRETIVE ESSAYS 
I am inclined to think that, so far, the theory is true. It is, 
insofar as it is true, merely an empirical claim, which might be 
upset by the discovery of people who do think in purely ab-
stract fashion. But that is, presumably, all Aristotle means to 
claim for it. God would not require phiwtasia. There are, how-
ever,. a number of problems with Aristotle's exposition of his 
view. He suggests strongly, with his i\frm. triangle example 
(which even uses the phrase "he places before his eyes"), that 
the activity he has in mind is quasi-visual and involves a picture-
like object, and, too, that this object symbolizes in virtue of a 
similarity. He may even be suggesting that every such object, 
like a picture, is definite (and dense?) in a way we have argued 
imaginings need not be: he seems to say we can't help picturing 
the triangle as of some definite size. Aristotle takes picturing 
as his central case and similarity as his central case of pictorial 
representation. He docs not present the example as an exhaus-
tive analysis, but he certainly docs not indicate that such a 
reading of it would be limited or wrong. (The fact that as he 
concludes his I I I .8 exposition he is troubled about how to dis-
tinguish pha11tt1smatt1 from the prota 11oe111ata68 does, however, 
suggest that he is not deliberately restricting the account to the 
pictorial-for how, then, would any such confusion arise?) 
A second problem is that his denial that thinking is physical 
commits him to what we might consider a messy overcom-
plexity. If it is true that my thought of the sun's true size must 
be accompanied by some symbolizing, isn't it very likely to be 
much the same as the pre-judgmental phamasia that secs it as a 
foot wide? But the exigencies of Aristotle's account of action, 
as we saw, will force him in all such cases (for we have no 
reason to think the sun case ought to be analyzed differently 
from a practical case) to insert an extra pha11tasi,1. One solution 
might be for Aristotle to adopt for thinking the same sort of 
account he gives for other life-processes: that it is a functional 
state of matter (cf. Essays I and 3). But there are, I think, good 
non-arbitrary reasons (having nothing to do with Platonist con-
58 Probably the asunthet,1, the basic and simple concepts discussed in 
Metaph. IX.10. 
267 


=== PAGE 58 ===
ARISTOTLE'S DI~ .\IOTU ANI.\IAUU.\I 
scrvarism) that prevent the adoption of this picture-reasons 
connected with his rheor}" of action and responsibilit}".69 This, 
however, is nor the rime to become enmeshed in an analysis of 
these complicated problems. 
Aristotle's rheorY' of ph111tt1sia attempts to deal with a large 
range of problems. vVith some of these it is more successful 
than with others. And the theory is so inclusive that it is not 
always easy to sec how its various parts fall into place, or even 
whether they really do constitute a uni ficd theory. The basic 
insight underlying the theory is the important one that per-
ceptual reception is inseparable from interpretation-that we 
cannot explain an animal's perception of something as a distinct 
feature in his environment with reference only to a process of 
receiving or imprinting, but must refer also to his interpretive 
activity, the activity in virtue of which the scene appears 
a certain way to him. This activity, as Aristotle saw, is de-
pendent not onl}" on the creature's natural endowment, but also 
on its past and on its other present activities. As in science 
generall}" the philosopher must begin with and return to the 
plzainomena (and not to some "pure" or "raw" data), so, in 
the explanation of action, he must begin not with received, 
unprocessed sensory material, but with the way the world looks 
to the particular creature, what it sees things as. It is this 
interest in appearing, and nor a conviction that images play a 
central explanatory role, rhar underlies Aristotle's development 
of a theory of phmtasia and his use of it to explain such appar-
ently diverse happenings as imagination, dreaming, delusion, 
and motivation. This unified theory of awareness supplements 
his account of aisthesis in an important way. Imaging could, 
and does, find its place within this theory, bur Aristotle is right 
nor to make it theoretically central; because he docs not, 
his sub-theory of imaging is less objectionable than the blanket 
69 The general line I would take would be to trace the worries of DI 9 
about the compatibility of freedom of action with causal determinism to 
DA 111.5, where the separable, non-physical nous is im·okcd to explain 
why, out of all the potential objects of thought, we focus on some and not 
others. 
268 


=== PAGE 59 ===
l~TERPRETI\.E ESSAYS 
theory that is sometimes ascribed to him. And he is also right 
to make it the job of the same theory to explain both practical 
and non-practical cases; for these differ not cognitively, but 
only with reference to the role played by desire. It is perhaps 
the mistaken notion that epistemology and the explanation of 
action arc, for Aristotle, two different branches of inquiry, 
that has led many critics to mark off some phantasia-contexts 
from others and to fed no qualms about offering an interpreta-
tion for one set that could not fit the other. To move a creature 
to action, an object must appear to him: he must select it, 
mark it off, organize it, interpret it. But this is, desire aside, 
what it is to St't' it. Learning to perceive, as Aristotle cells us, 
is learning to make distinctions.7° The passive infant may re-
ceive some stimuli, but perception, thought, and action all pre-
suppose the exercise of ph111t,1si,1.il 
70 On seeing .ind making distinctions, cf . . \lrt.iph. I. I, 9801126-27 Sms. 
432
112 ff., also l'h. 184-"2--¼. where cogniti,·c de,·clopmcnt is again a 
matter of progressi\"cly sophisticated sorting and interpreting. Note that 
Aristotle's blanket name for the cogniti,·c faculties is the kritik.1-thosc 
that "sort" or "discriminate.·• 
71 This paper den:lopcd side by side with a forthcoming one on the same 
general topic by .\ blcolm Schofield. which addresses itself to different 
passages and reaches r;1thcr ditfcrcnt conclusions. I am indebted to him for 
his criticisms and for some helpful com·ersations about the c,·idcnce. 
269 
