                                         9
     ARISTOTLE ON THE PERCEPTION
        AND COGNITION OF TIME

                                   John Bowin



Aristotle claims that time can be perceived. In Physics 4.11 he says we perceive
motion and time together and he says that we can perceive instants, or “nows”
as he calls them (219a3–4; 219a30–b1). At various places in De Memoria 1, he
also says that the perception of time is involved in remembering (Mem.1.449b29,
450a19, 451a17). Aristotle thinks that by measuring time we can grasp it intel-
lectually as well. He talks of “apprehending time by a measure” in De Memoria 2
(452b7), and I shall argue that this is a way of grasping time intellectually.
   This chapter will attempt to clarify what is and is not involved in these two
modes of apprehending time, and the way in which they interact. I will ultimately
argue that, according to Aristotle, one’s intellectual grasp of time has an effect
on one’s perception of time for those beings who have intellect. But ﬁrst I will
establish that, for Aristotle, perceiving time does not presuppose grasping it
intellectually. This is important, for Aristotle, because he wishes to credit ani-
mals lacking intellect with memory, and he deﬁnes memory in a way that presup-
poses the perception of time: Some animals are sagacious (φρόνιμος) and can be
taught, and since they lack intellect, they must rely on memory for this ability
(Meta.Α.1.980a28 ff.). But we remember having learned something only when
we recognize that we have learned it before, and this requires the perception of
time (Mem.1.450a14–450a20). Hence, in order to explain animal sagacity without
crediting them with intellect, Aristotle must maintain that time can be perceived
without intellect.
   Still, two things might tempt one to suppose that the perception of time none-
theless requires intellect. First, since Aristotle deﬁnes time as “a number of motion
in respect of the before and after” (Physics 4.11.219b1–2), and since number is a
mathematical object, and according to Aristotle, mathematical objects are grasped
by the intellect through abstraction1 and, in the case of numbers, counting, it
would appear that time must be grasped in this way. And indeed, Aristotle seems
to say in Physics 4.11 that it is by a process of counting that we come to know
that time exists. Second, in Physics 4.14 Aristotle argues that time would not exist
in the absence of beings who can count. Since the existence of time depends on


                                        175
                                  JOHN BOWIN

counting, one might suppose that the perception of time depends on counting
also. I will argue that neither time’s status as a number, nor its apparent depend-
ence on mind requires it to be grasped intellectually. In particular, I will argue that
commentators, both ancient and modern, have overemphasized the importance of
counting in Aristotle’s account of time at the expense of time perception.

                               1. Perceiving time
Albert the Great, for instance, commenting on Aristotle’s claim at De Memoria
1.449b28–9 that memory is possible only in beings who perceive time says,

    Time is perceived (sentire) in twofold fashion. One way is in itself (in se),
    according to a number of motion. Only rational beings perceive (sentire)
    and know (cognoscere) time in this manner. In another way time is per-
    ceived relationally and not in itself; then it is perceived according to a
    ﬁxed distinction of time, according to which a time is located near a
    temporal event.
                                                (B. Alberti Magni 1890, 100)2

Themistius, while commenting on Aristotle’s claim at De Anima 3.11.433b5–11
that a conﬂict between reason and desire is possible only in beings who perceive
time, makes a very similar claim:

    For [a human being] perceives (αἰσθάνεσθαι) time [as time is] in itself,
    but the other [animals perceive it] incidentally, since they [perceive] not
    time but [only] the way that they were affected at an earlier time. . . .
    Only a human being is “at once turned front and back”, for it alone has
    an intellect (νοῦς) by which to count (ἀριθμεῖν) what is before and after,
    and this number is time.
                                              (Themistius 1899, 120,12–17)3

Nothing in the immediate context of the passages that occasion these comments
justiﬁes these claims.4 But the mention of time as a number evidently refers to
Aristotle’s deﬁnition of time as a number of motion. Albert the Great seems to
think that merely because time is a mathematical object, grasping it in itself
must require grasping it intellectually. Themistius’ thought appears to be that
perceiving time in itself requires νοῦς5 because it requires counting and, accord-
ing to Aristotle, only beings with νοῦς are able to count (Phys.4.14.223a26; cf.
Top.6.5.142b26).6
   Must, then, time be grasped intellectually because it is a mathematical object?
This would clearly be the case if numbers were ontologically constituted by
the mind of the mathematician. The extent to which Aristotle thinks this is true
of mathematical objects in general is controversial.7 It is clear that, in Aristo-
tle’s view, mathematical objects are sensible objects studied qua having certain


                                         176
           ARISTOTLE ON PERCEPTION AND COGNITION

properties. But it is not clear if or to what extent these properties are actually
present in the sensible world independently of the mind of the mathematician.
For it is not clear, as Aristotle seems to admit in places (Metaph.B.2.997b35–
998a6; K.1.1059b10–12), whether ordinary sensible objects supply properties of
sufﬁcient quality and variety for mathematical study. And Aristotle does talk, in
places, about the construction by geometers of geometrical objects in the course
of geometrical proofs, a process by which such objects are brought from potential
to actual existence (Metaph.Θ.1.1051a21–33; cf. M.3.1078a28–31).
   But I think it would be wrong to suppose that just because sensible reality does
not supply all of the mathematician’s needs, none of the properties that the math-
ematician is interested in can be found fully actual in the sensible world. And the
case of arithmetic is very different from the case of geometry. A geometer studies
geometrical objects, which are sensible objects qua having geometrical qualities.
And it is perhaps plausible to say that sensible objects can only instantiate these
properties imperfectly or potentially, and that, as a result, abstraction from their
imperfections is required to bring geometrical objects to actuality. But an arithme-
tician studies numbers, which are pluralities of things studied qua indivisible and
countable.8 And there is no reason to suppose that perfect and actual specimens
of indivisibles cannot be found among sensible objects and events. A man, for
instance, is perfectly and actually indivisible qua man. And more importantly in
the case of time, as we shall see, instantaneous motion stages are perfectly and
actually indivisible insofar as they are instantaneous. No abstraction is required to
bring them to actuality.
   Does Physics 4.11, nonetheless require us to count in order to grasp that time
exists? The answer to this question turns on the interpretation of a passage shortly
before Aristotle’s deﬁnition of time as “a number of motion in respect of the
before and after” at 219b1–2:

    But time, too, we apprehend when we mark off motion, marking it off
    by the before and after, and we say that time has passed when we get a
    perception of the before and after in motion. We mark off motion by tak-
    ing them to be different things, and some other thing between them; for
    whenever we conceive of the limits as other than the middle, and the soul
    says that the nows are two, one before and one after, then it is and this it
    is that we say time is. (What is marked off by the now is thought to be
    time: let this be taken as true.)
                                              (Physics 4.11.219a22–219a29)9

It is clear that “number”, here, refers to a number of instantaneous stages of
motion, because what are numbered are the bounds or limits of a motion. What
Aristotle’s deﬁnition of time appears to tell us, in the light of this passage, is
that time exists just in case there is a number (i.e., two or more, since Aristotle
thinks one is not a number) of instantaneous stages of motion limiting something
in between (a number of instantaneous stages of motion being just a plurality of

                                        177
                                  JOHN BOWIN

instantaneous stages of motion studied qua indivisible and countable). What lies
between is temporal duration.
    We can also gather from this passage that to perceive time and to notice that
time has passed, it is sufﬁcient to perceive a number of motion stages. One might
take this to mean that we thereby perceive time only indirectly,10 if at all, but
I think this is mistaken. Aristotle is willing on many occasions to simply say that
we perceive time (Phys. 4.11.219a3–4, Mem.1.449b29, 450a19, 451a17), and he
says at Phys. 4.11.219a30–b1 that we perceive the now as both one and as before
and after in a motion. He also says we perceive motion and time together (219a3–
4). What Aristotle means by this is that we perceive both time and motion directly
because to perceive a number of nows is to perceive a plurality of instantaneous
motion stages under a certain description. That is, both the now and time are
what are before and after in motion qua countable (Phys. 4.14.223a28–9, Phys.
4.11.219b23–8). So to perceive time and to notice that time has passed, it is suf-
ﬁcient to perceive a number of nows (Phys. 4.11.219a30–219b1). That to perceive
time in a way just is to perceive a number of nows is implied by Aristotle’s refor-
mulation of the deﬁnition of time at Physics 4.14.223a28–9. There he says, “the
before and after are in motion, and time is these qua countable”. Since what are
before and after in motion qua countable are nows, and in particular, a number of
nows ordered as before and after, to perceive time just is to perceive a number of
nows ordered as before and after.
    It is also commonly thought that when Aristotle says “the soul says that the
nows are two” at Physics 4.11.219a27–8, he is talking about counting nows. One
might be tempted to conclude from this that in order to perceive a number of
motion stages it is necessary to count them. This seems to be Themistius’ inter-
pretation, since he says that the before and after in motion is recognized as a suc-
cession whenever it is counted (148,12–13). On the other hand, one might accept
that Aristotle is talking about counting nows, here, but deny that counting nows is
necessary for perceiving that time has passed.11 To perceive that time has passed,
it is merely necessary to recognize that there are a number of motion stages. But
one may wonder, then, why should Aristotle talk about counting nows at all in
Physics 4.11?
    One suggestion has been that nows must be counted because they are brought
into existence by the act of counting.12 This is thought to follow from three
assumptions: ﬁrst, that nows are only potential divisions in time; second, that
there are not inﬁnitely many potential divisions in a continuum (hence, they are
not already there to be counted even as potential entities); third, that the only
way to create potential divisions or mark them off (ὁρίζειν) is by counting them.
Aristotle clearly says that the now “divides potentially” (Phys. 4.13.222a14), but
the second assumption appears to be contradicted by Aristotle’s claim at Physics
8.8.263a27–8, 263b3–6 that time has inﬁnitely many potential parts.13 So nows
exist potentially, prior to being marked off, and since this is how nows exist in
any case, it follows that they already exist prior to being marked off or counted.
But even if we reject this interpretation of Physics 8.8 and hold that it is necessary

                                         178
           ARISTOTLE ON PERCEPTION AND COGNITION

to mark off nows in order for them to exist, the third assumption seems unwar-
ranted, since it seems entirely possible to mark off nows by merely perceiving
them. Aristotle says that nows can be perceived at Physics 4.11.219a30–219b1
and he says that perception is capable of discriminating (Post. An. 2.19.99b35;
Top. 2.4.111a14–20; DA.2.11.424a6; 3.2.426b8–21). And if marking off nows
means discriminating them as individuals, there is circumstantial though con-
vincing evidence that Aristotelian perception is perfectly able to do this by itself,
without the help of intellect. First, incidental perception is the perception of indi-
viduals, for example, Diares’ or Cleon’s son, though not necessarily as Diares’ or
Cleon’s son. If Diares’ or Cleon’s son were necessarily perceived as Diares’ or
Cleon’s son, the perceiver would presumably need to possess the sortal concept
man, and, therefore, possess intellect as well.14 But as Cashdollar15 points out,
at De Anima 2.6.418a16–17 Aristotle also offers “where” as well as “what” as
incidental perceptibles, which seems to imply that one can incidentally perceive,
for example, “the thing over there” or “the white thing” as well. Hence, we can
perceive individuals incidentally, and while perceiving an individual incidentally
sometimes involves the possession of a sortal concept, it does not always require
it.16 The second reason to think that Aristotelian perception can discriminate indi-
viduals is that Aristotle appears to talk of perceiving individual φαντάσματα17
of both objects and events in the De Memoria. The account of the way in which
φαντάσματα are formed in De Memoria 1 seems to imply that they appear as, and
indeed are fully individuated particulars. Aristotle uses the metaphor of a signet
ring (cf. DA 2.12.424a19) to describe how a percept gives rise to a φαντάσμα
(Mem.1.450a27–32), and the mechanical nature of this metaphor, as well as of the
ensuing discussion about the causes of defects in memory, suggests that individual
sense objects give rise to individual φαντάσματα. And in De Memoria 2.452b23
ff. where φαντάσματα take the form of motions instead of images, Aristotle
talks of matching motions representing events (e.g., ὅτι ὁδήποτε ἐποίησεν) with
motions representing time lapses (e.g., τρίτῃ ἡμέρᾳ), and it seems that this pairing
could not proceed unless the motions were individuals. Finally, in De Memoria
1, Aristotle talks of φαντάσματα serving as the raw material from which, by a
process of abstraction, the intellect grasps essences, which presumably includes
sortal concepts (449b31–450a7). So it seems the possession of sortal concepts
presupposes the prior perception of individuals rather than the other way around.
    In fact, I do not think that when Aristotle says, “the soul says that the nows are
two”, he is talking about counting nows. Counting (ἀριθμεῖν) is not explicitly
mentioned in chapters 10 or 11 until after Aristotle’s deﬁnition of time at Phys-
ics 4.11.219b1–2, and there in a conjunction with being countable (ἀριθμητόν).
He says,

    For that is what time is: a number of motion in respect of the before and
    after. So time is not motion but in the way in which motion has a number.
    An indication: we discriminate the greater and the less by number, and
    greater and less motion by time; hence time is a kind of number. But

                                         179
                                  JOHN BOWIN

    number is [so-called] in two ways: we call number both that which is
    counted and countable, and that by which we count. Time is that which
    is counted and not that by which we count. (That by which we count is
    different from that which is counted.)
                                                     (Phys. 4.11.219b1–9)

Counting, I think, plays a much smaller role in Physics 4.10–14 than is often sup-
posed.18 What is important for Aristotle is that numbers are countable, not neces-
sarily that they are counted: time is the before and after in motion qua countable
(Phys. 4.14.223a29) and the now is the before and after in motion qua countable
(Phys. 4.11.219b25; 28). This is borne out by a survey of the text. After the pas-
sage quoted previously, the verb ἀριθμεῖν appears eight more times in the remain-
der of book 4. Of these occurrences, three are concerned only with the possibility
of counting (Phys. 4.14.223a23–5) and three are concerned with repeating the
distinction between the number with which we count and the number which is
counted (Phys. 4.11.219b6–9; Phys. 4.12.220b4–5, 8–9), or countable, as we have
just seen. The remaining two uses are idiosyncratic.19
   I suggest, rather, that when Aristotle says “the mind pronounces that the ‘nows’
are two” at Physics 4.11.219a27–8, this need only imply that the mind perceives
the number of (countable) nows, not that it counts them. Aristotle says that number
is perceived directly (καθ’ αὑτά) by the common sense in De Anima 3.1 (425a16,
cf. 2.6.418a7–11), soon after saying that “all the senses are possessed by those ani-
mals that are neither imperfect nor maimed” (425a9–10). So the direct perception
of number is not limited to beings with intellect. The common sense, in both ani-
mals and humans, has the ability to perceive a collection of objects or events and
just see (or hear or feel) how many there are without counting them.20 And in fact,
Aristotle credits animals with the ability to perceive numbers even while denying
them the ability to count.21 For how else could birds, for example, keep track of the
number of eggs in their clutch, as Aristotle says they do in HA 6.6: “The eagle lays
three eggs and hatches two of them, as it is said in the verses ascribed to Musaeus:
‘That lays three, hatches two, and cares for one’ ” (563a17–19).
   So the soul may perceive that “the ‘nows’ are two” without counting them. The
soul can also, no doubt, perceive that the “nows” are three or four, without much
difﬁculty either, and perceive their order of succession without counting them. In
fact, since nows appear in succession, and not in unstructured sets, it is possible
to perceptually discriminate relative quantities of motion, and the relative sizes of
elapsed durations by perceiving the number as well as the order of the instanta-
neous motion phases, since later nows bound more of the past than earlier ones.
This, I think, is what Aristotle is getting at when, shortly after giving his deﬁnition
of time he says, “we discriminate (κρίνειν) the greater and the less by number, and
greater and less motion by time”. As I said, perception is a faculty that discrimi-
nates. By perceiving the number and order of successive instantaneous phases
of a motion, at least if one perceives more than two of them, we perceptually



                                         180
           ARISTOTLE ON PERCEPTION AND COGNITION

discriminate whether more or less time has passed. This is not yet time measure-
ment, since it does not involve the application of a standard. It is merely a percep-
tual grasp of the number and relative magnitude of motion.

                              2. Measuring time
Perceiving time, then, consists in either perceiving that time has passed by per-
ceiving a number (two or more) of nows, or perceiving how much time has passed,
in purely relative terms, by perceiving the order as well as the number of nows.
Perceiving time in no way requires counting. But measuring time does require
counting in a way, and therefore also intellect. In the following passage, the verb
ἀριθμεῖν is used in an extended sense to mean measuring:

    Since there is locomotion, and, as a kind of locomotion, circular motion,
    and since each thing is counted (ἀριθμεῖται) by some one thing of the
    same kind (units by a unit, horses by a horse), and therefore time too
    by some determinate (ὡρισμένῳ) time, and since, as we said, time is
    measured by motion and motion by time (that is, the quantity of the
    motion and of the time is measured by the motion deﬁned by time) – if,
    then, that which is ﬁrst is the measure of all things of the same sort, then
    uniform circular motion is most of all a measure, because the number
    of this is most easily known. (There is no uniform qualitative change or
    uniform increase in size or uniform coming-to-be, but there is uniform
    locomotion.) This is why time is thought to be the motion of the [celes-
    tial] sphere, because the other motions are measured by this one, and
    time by this motion.
                                                     (Physics 4.14.223b13–24)

Here, Aristotle says that we measure time by counting units of time (e.g., days)
which are determinate because they are marked out by motions that are deter-
minate in time (e.g., celestial motions). The reason that the use of ἀριθμεῖν is
extended, here, is that strictly speaking, counting is a type of measurement for
Aristotle, not vice versa. Counting is the type of measurement that is most exact
because the measure that it involves is absolutely indivisible, rather than “indivis-
ible in relation to perception” (Metaph.I.1.1053a1, 23). So strictly speaking, nows
may be counted, because they are absolutely indivisible, but durations may only
be measured. Still, at Physics 4.12.220a27–8, Aristotle says that parts of continua
can have a “number of a sort” (τὶς ἀριθμὸς) insofar as they can be divided into a
number of parts, and this, presumably, is the sense of number here. In fact, it is
primarily in counting number in this extended sense, that is, in measurement, that
the process of counting has any prominence in these chapters.22
   It is this, time measurement, that requires νοῦς, and it is this that affords an
intellectual grasp of time. The best evidence for this is in De Memoria 2, where,



                                        181
                                 JOHN BOWIN

in language very similar to the passage quoted from Physics 4.14, Aristotle claims
that measuring time affords a certain type of cognition of it:

    But the main thing is that one must apprehend (γνωρίζειν) the time, either
    by a measure (μέτρῳ) or indeterminately (ἀορίστως). . . . Sometimes a
    person does not remember (μεμνῆσθαι) the time by a measure e.g. that
    he did something or other the day before yesterday; but sometimes also
    he does remember the time this way. Nonetheless, he remembers, even
    if it be not by a measure. And people are in the habit of saying that they
    remember but don’t know (εἰδέναι) when, whenever they do not appre-
    hend the amount of time by a measure.
                                          (Mem.2.452b8–9; 452b30–453a4)23

Whenever we measure time by counting determinate units of time like days, we
apprehend (γνωρίζειν) time and the amount of time determinately. Otherwise, we
apprehend time and the amount of time indeterminately (ἀορίστως). Γνωρίζειν
is a general term that comprehends both perceiving (αἰσθάνεσθαι) and thinking
(διανοεῖσθαι) (cf. GA.1.23.731a33–4). The contrast, here, is between grasping
time or the quantity of time intellectually (διανοεῖσθαι) by means of a measure
(μέτρῳ) and perceiving time (αἰσθάνεσθαι).
   Apprehending time by a measure is clearly an achievement of the intellect.
Aristotle claims that a measure must be of the same genus as what it measures.
For example, spatial magnitudes are measured by a spatial magnitude and times
are measured by some deﬁnite time (Phys. 4.14.223a22–8, Meta.I.1053a24–30).
And since a measure is that by which a quantity is apprehended, it is clear that
one must grasp the genus of the measure and the thing measured in order to meas-
ure it. Thus, one must possess what we would call the universal sortal concept
of horse when counting horses and the sortal concepts of day and hour when
measuring time. Conception is an activity that Aristotle denies beings lacking
intellect.24 Apprehending time indeterminately, on the other hand, seems only to
be an achievement of perception. It entails perceiving that time has passed since
some remembered event, but not knowing how much. This could be construed, as
in Physics 4.11, as merely perceiving a number of motion stages ordered as before
and after, which, minimally, could be just perceiving that a past event is distinct
from what one is now experiencing. To apprehend time indeterminately, accord-
ing to the account of time perception in Physics 4.11, is merely to perceive time.

            3. Memory, imagination, the perception of time,
                   and the perception of motion
Aristotle talks of remembering time at De Memoria 2.452b30–453a4 rather than
perceiving time and this raises a number of questions, the most obvious of which
is whether Aristotle recognizes a difference between remembering and perceiv-
ing time. For instance, perceiving time might be perceiving time as it is passing

                                       182
           ARISTOTLE ON PERCEPTION AND COGNITION

while remembering time might be remembering that time has elapsed since a
remembered event. Aristotle could not be clearer that it is remembering time, in
this sense, that he is concerned with in the De Memoria. It is remembering that
time has elapsed since a remembered event that makes contemplating a repre-
sentation of that event remembering something. But he calls this perceiving time
in De Memoria 1: “For, as we said before, when someone is actively engaged in
memory, he perceives in addition (προσαισθάνεται) that he saw this, or heard
it, or learned it earlier; and earlier and later are in time” (449b29; cf. 450a19,
451a17). Sorabji speculates that Aristotle is using a broader sense of “perceive”,
here, to emphasize that memory is a perceptual and not an intellectual activity.25
But I think that Aristotle calls this perceiving time because he does not distinguish
between remembering time and perceiving time as it is passing, and I say this for
two reasons.
    First, I would distinguish between perceiving time as it is passing from perceiv-
ing time passing, that is, perceiving the passage of time. In Physics 4.11, where
the topic is time and not memory, Aristotle speaks of perceiving time as it is pass-
ing in terms of perceiving time having passed, not perceiving time passing. While
temporal passage is mentioned seven times in this chapter, Aristotle nowhere
talks about perceiving time passing. Each time he speaks of time having passed
(γεγονέναι χρόνος) in the perfect tense rather than the present. In each case we are
said to think, say or suppose that time has passed rather than that time is passing
(Phys. 4.11.218b23, 32–3, 219a6, 7, 14, 24, 32–3). Aristotle is of course interested
in the phenomenon of temporal passage. The puzzle of the ceasing instant at Phys-
ics 4.10.218a8–21 and his claim in Chapter 11 that the now is always “other and
other” (219b9–10) are clearly references to temporal passage. And in De Memo-
ria 1, Aristotle speaks of memory as a state or affection of perception whenever
time passes (ὅταν γένηται χρόνος, 449b25). But in neither work does he speak of
perceiving time passing. The second reason to think Aristotle does not distinguish
between remembering time and perceiving time as it is passing is that, according
to the account of perceiving time in Physics 4.11, perceiving time having passed
is just remembering that time has elapsed since a remembered event. According
to Physics 4.11, to perceive time is to perceive a number of motion stages ordered
as before and after. But if as I said, this can be just perceiving that a remembered
event is distinct from what one is now experiencing, it is no different from remem-
bering that time has elapsed since a remembered event.
    Another question that talk of remembering time raises concerns the relation-
ship between memory and the perception of time, and due to the deﬁnitional
relationship between time and motion, the relationship between memory and
the perception of motion. If to perceive time is to perceive a number of motion
stages ordered as before and after, one might think that in order to do this, it is at
least necessary to remember the motion stages perceived as before. If to perceive
motion is just to perceive a plurality of motion stages, and since only one instan-
taneous motion stage can be present at a time, it follows that some of the motion
stages will need to be remembered. Hence both the perception of time and motion


                                         183
                                  JOHN BOWIN

seem to presuppose memory.26 But since Aristotle claims that memory requires
the perception of time, this would imply that memory and the perception of time
presuppose each other.
   A way to avoid this consequence would seem to lie in Aristotle’s discussion of
certain memory failures.27 In De Memoria 1, Aristotle explains the notion of per-
ceiving time by saying, “When someone is actively engaged in memory, he per-
ceives in addition that he saw this, or heard it, or learned it before; and before and
after are in time” (450a19–22). In Chapter 2 we ﬁnd out what “perceives in addi-
tion” means. Both memory and the perception of time involve φαντάσματα and
therefore φαντασία; two φαντάσματα, in fact, one representing the event remem-
bered and one representing the time elapsed since the event.28 To remember, or to
recognize that an event happened before is to have a φαντάσμα of a movement
corresponding to the time match a φαντάσμα of a movement corresponding to the
event (Mem.2.452b31–453a4). If, however, one of these φαντάσματα is missing,
one fails to remember. Hence, memory presupposes the perception of time, and
both memory and the perception of time presuppose the having of φαντάσματα,
but the perception of time does not presuppose memory.
   It is clear from this that the perception of time depends on φαντασία.29 But
it is not yet clear that time, after all, does not in some way depend on memory.
The problem is that a φαντάσμα of a movement corresponding to a time is itself
of a series of events that can be remembered. (The movement corresponding to
the time is a φαντάσμα or an appearance, not an unconscious internal clock pro-
cess, as envisaged by modern theories of interval perception.) One could say,
perhaps, that these events are not remembered unless there is a further series of
φαντάσματα to match the events in the movement corresponding to the time. But
then we are off on a regress. Why, however, must the movement corresponding
to the time and the movement corresponding to the event be separate? One could
concede that they are sometimes or even often separate without requiring that
they must always be separate. And when they are not separate we could say that
to perceive time and to remember an event is the same activity under different
descriptions. This is because, according to Physics 4.11, to perceive time is to
perceive a number of events ordered as before and after. Since the perception of
an event that happened before as before must inevitably be a φαντάσμα (Aristotle
says we can perceive φαντάσματα at Mem.1.450b17–18), then to remember an
event is to perceive time and vice versa. So memory and the perception of time are
interdeﬁned, which is a circularity, but not necessarily a vicious one.
   What of the apparent dependence of the perception of motion on memory?
Perhaps we could say we perceive motion by perceiving a plurality of motion
stages, but none of them as having happened before. Or more accurately, since
Aristotle talks of “perceiving” φαντάσματα, we perceive a retained plurality of
φαντάσματα30 representing motion stages, but none of them as having happened
before.31 But if the past phases of a motion can be represented by φαντάσματα
that are not perceived as before, then perceiving a number of motion stages is
not sufﬁcient for perceiving time. According to Physics 4.11, in order to perceive


                                         184
           ARISTOTLE ON PERCEPTION AND COGNITION

time, past phases of a motion must be perceived as past. How could past phases
of a motion not be perceived as past? Perhaps if they fell within a specious pre-
sent (though there is little evidence for this concept in Aristotle).32 Still, it seems
plausible that past motion stages could be so recent that they seem to be present.


            4. The effect of intellect on the perception of time
So according to Aristotle, perceiving time does not presuppose grasping it intel-
lectually, but grasping time intellectually, I will now argue, has an effect on how
one perceives time for those beings who have intellect. This idea, I think, is behind
the following passage from Pseudo-Philoponus:

    By “time” Aristotle means determinate (ὡρισμένον) time, not indeter-
    minate (ἀόριστον). In this way, at least, he says in the de Interpreta-
    tione “some simply, some in time”,33 meaning by “simply” indeterminate
    time, and by “in time” determinate time. Non-rational beings, then, even
    if they have conscious perception (συναίσθησις) of time, do not have
    conscious perception of determinate time, but only of winter, say, or
    summer. Human beings have conscious perception of determinate time
    because they count (ἀριθμεῖν) days and hours. Counting is proper only
    to the rational soul (ἡ λογικὴ ψυχή). On this account, then, he says that
    only man has conscious perception of determinate time, for non-rational
    beings too have conscious perception of the indeterminate.34

The distinction, here, is different from the one Aristotle makes at Mem.2.452b8–9
and 452b30–453a4 because it is a distinction between types of perception
(αἴσθησις), not apprehension in general (γνῶσις). If we take a “determinate time”
to mean, as in Physics 4.14, a time used as a measure because it is marked out
by a regular motion, Pseudo-Philoponus is saying that only humans perceive,
for example, days as measures of time. Only humans can do this because only
humans can treat days as measures by using them to count. Animals may still per-
ceive a day, but not as a day if by “day” we mean a unit of measurement.
   Pseudo-Philoponus, like Themistius in the passage quoted earlier, is commenting
on De Anima 3.10, 433b5–11, where Aristotle claims that perception (αἴσθησις) of
time is necessary in beings where reason (ὁ λόγος) and desires (αἱ ἐπιθυμίαι) con-
ﬂict because “νοῦς bids us hold back because of what is future”. Now the percep-
tion of time, here, is obviously not of the sort we encountered in Physics 4.10–14 or
in the De Memoria. Perceiving time in those texts amounts to perceiving an ordered
series of past or present events. Here, perceiving time is perceiving the future.
Strictly speaking, though, one does not perceive the future, as Aristotle points out in
De Memoria 1, 449b27.35 But we can perceive φαντάσματα (Mem.1.450b17–18),
and in De Anima 3.7, he says this is very much like perceiving the future: “Some-
times by means of the φαντάσματα or thoughts which are within the soul, just as if
it were seeing, [the faculty of thinking] calculates and deliberates what is to come

                                         185
                                  JOHN BOWIN

(τὰ μέλλοντα) by reference to what is present” (DA.3.7.431b6–8). The justiﬁcation
for calling this perceiving, perhaps, is that if contemplating φαντάσματα of past
events can be called perceiving time, contemplating φαντάσματα of future events
can as well, even if the events may never happen.
   The involvement of deliberation, here, is important. The νοῦς that holds us
back because of what is future is calculative or deliberative reason (i.e., διάνοια,
cf. DA.3.10.433a14). And the φαντασία involved in perceiving the future, I sug-
gest, is deliberative φαντασία, which is contrasted with perceptual φαντασία in
the following passage:

    Perceptual φαντασία, as we have said, is found in the other animals also,
    but deliberative [φαντασία] in those which are capable of calculating [ἐν
    τοῖς λογιστικοῖς] (for the decision whether to do this or that is already a
    task for calculating [λογισμοῦ ἔργον]; and one must measure (μετρεῖν) by
    a single standard; for one pursues what is greater (τὸ μεῖζον); hence one
    has the ability to make (ποιεῖν) one image out of many (φαντασμάτων).
                                                        (DA.3.11.434a6–15)36

When Aristotle says, “one must measure (μετρεῖν) by a single standard; for one pur-
sues what is greater (τὸ μεῖζον)”, what springs to mind is something like Socrates’
ἡ μετρητικὴ τέχνη at Plato’s Protagoras 356d–e, that is, a measure of value. We
reckon by some measure of value which of two contemplated actions will result in
more, for example, pleasure, wealth, or happiness. But the text is more general than
this. It says only that deliberation or calculation about a choice of actions requires
a measure with which to calculate what is greater (τὸ μεῖζον); a single uniﬁed
measure that is synthesized out of many φαντάσματα. I do not think this general-
ity is accidental, because, while deliberation may often culminate in calculations
of value, it also typically requires calculating other sorts of quantities as well. In
order to maximize the value of a crop, for instance, one must ﬁrst deliberate about
how much seed to plant, how often to water, how long to wait before planting, and
how long to wait before harvesting. According to Aristotle, in this case we start
our deliberation with the objective of maximizing crop value, and work backward
from that in a chain of reasoning that ends in determining the ﬁrst action towards
achieving this goal, for example, buying a certain quantity of a certain type of seed
at a certain time. If, indeed, Aristotle is expressing himself with an eye towards
this more general idea of measurement and calculation, then one of the many func-
tions of deliberative φαντασία should be to effect a synthesis of φαντάσματα into
a uniﬁed φαντάσμα that we use to reckon time: days, months, and years. If this is
accepted, it can support Pseudo-Philoponus’ distinction between the perception
of determinate and indeterminate time because the former will be a function of
deliberative φαντασία while the latter will be a function of perceptual φαντασία.
   As we have already noted, Aristotle talks of inner “movements” by which we
discriminate greater and smaller times in De Memoria 2. Though called “move-
ments”, these are also φαντάσματα, as De Memoria 1, 451a3 makes clear, and so

                                        186
           ARISTOTLE ON PERCEPTION AND COGNITION

the representation of time periods is a function of φαντασία. And as already noted,
these “movements” are of two kinds. When the “movement” represents a deter-
minate time (cf. Phys. 4.14.223b15), for example, a day, we apprehend time and
the amount of time determinately. Otherwise, we apprehend time and the amount
of time indeterminately. So the suggestion, here, is that “movements” represent-
ing determinate time are a product of a synthesis of φαντάσματα undertaken by
deliberative φαντασία.
   If this is accepted, then Pseudo-Philoponus’ distinction will be one between
real differences in phenomenal content, not just differences in the way we regard
or use phenomenal content.37 This is because deliberative φαντασία is a sort of
φαντασία that is modiﬁed by the active involvement of intellect. When Aristotle
says that the measure consists in a φαντάσμα that is a unity made out of many
φαντάσματα, it sounds very similar to what he says about the genesis of experi-
ence from memory. In Posterior Analytics 2.19.100a3–9, Aristotle says, “From
perception there comes memory, as we call it, and from memory (when it occurs
often in connection with the same thing), experience; for memories that are many
in number form a single experience”, and at Metaphysics A.1.980b26–981a12,
“many memories of the same thing produce ﬁnally the capacity for a single expe-
rience”. A memory, we know, is a special sort of φαντάσμα; one in which the
φαντάσμα is taken to represent an experience of the subject at a prior time. So
the relationship between experience and deliberative φαντασία is very close. One
difference, I think, is that one who deliberates is said to make (ποιεῖν) a unity out
of several φαντάσματα, which suggests that deliberative φαντασία is an exer-
cise of active φαντασία as described at De Anima 3.3.427b18–20: “[φαντασία]
is up to us when we wish (for it is possible to produce something before our
eyes, as those do who set things out in mnemonic systems38 and form images of
them)”. There is no suggestion in Metaphysics A 1 and in Posterior Analytics
2.19 that experience requires the active manipulation of images. Another differ-
ence is that the synthesis of images involved in deliberative φαντασία is found
only “in those which are capable of calculating”, while experience is also found
in at least some irrational animals (Meta.A.1.980b25–7). Deliberative φαντασία,
then, would seem to be a sort of experience, but one that occurs only in beings
who can calculate, and that characteristically requires the active manipulation of
images. Perceptual φαντασία presumably is what is involved in animal percep-
tion of time. All animals have perceptual φαντασία (DA.3.11.433b31–434a10,
2.2.413b21–3, 3.10.433a9 ff., Metaph. A 1, 980b25 ff.), except, perhaps, grubs
(DA.2.3.415a6–11 and 3.3.428a10 ff.). And humans with no deliberative faculty
(e.g., slaves allegedly) or an underdeveloped deliberative faculty (e.g., children)
will have only perceptual φαντασία (Politics 1.13.1260a12–14).
   The suggestion, then, is that the “movements” representing determinate time
are a product of the active manipulation of images by deliberative φαντασία in
beings who can deliberate. A worry, here, might be that this active manipula-
tion of images is a matter of conception rather than perception, and that Pseudo-
Philoponus’ distinction is misguided after all. Rather than distinguishing different


                                        187
                                  JOHN BOWIN

types of perception, we would have distinguished cognition from perception. But
I think it is reasonable to take the view that while intellect has a role in deter-
mining the content of the images produced by deliberative φαντασία, the content
itself remains non-conceptual. I suggest that while perceiving a day as a day for
the purpose of measuring time might employ a sortal concept, the perceptually
disambiguated image of a day in one’s mind – the normalized image of a day
shorn of the rough edges of its particularity such as seasonal variations in length
of daylight – may nonetheless be non-conceptual.39
   While not requiring it, this interpretation would be strengthened if we could
establish that Aristotle envisages non-conceptual ἐμπειρία, that is, that many mem-
ories may form a single experience in beings not possessed of reason. This is a
controversial subject, and one of the key texts on the issue is ambiguous. Posterior
Analytics 2.19, which describes the genesis of principles of art and science from
more primitive mental states, is ambiguous in its description of the transition to
these states from a state of experience. In the critical sentence describing this tran-
sition, Aristotle says that principles of art and science arise “from experience, or
from the whole universal that has come to rest in the soul” (100a6–7). Depending
on whether we read the “or” epexegetically or as a corrective meaning “or rather”,
the sentence will say either that experience involves universals or that it does not.40
   Still, there are other texts that would seem to favor the existence of non-con-
ceptual ἐμπειρία. Aristotle claims at Nicomachean Ethics 7.3.1147b5, that animals
“have no universal beliefs (καθόλου ὑπόληψιν) but only imagination (φαντασία)
and memory (μνήμη) of particulars”. And then in Metaphysics A 1, he credits all
animals with sensation and only some with memory and ἐμπειρία (980b25–7).
So the animals that have experience must have non-universal, which I take to be
non-conceptual, ἐμπειρία. And Aristotle seems to say that experience, which some
animals possess, does not involve universal concepts when he claims that a single
universal is present in the man with art but not in the man with experience (cf.
EN.6.7.1141b14–21). Humans also possess art and reason, which he contrasts with
experience in the respect that art apprehends universals while experience appre-
hends particulars. Nonetheless, the examples that Aristotle provides are unhelpful
in deciding this issue because they represent human cases of experience which
clearly presuppose the possession of concepts. Perhaps what Aristotle means is not
that the man possessing experience but not art lacks universal concepts altogether,
but just that he lacks the universal concept of a particular art, for example, medi-
cine. This does not bar him from having universal concepts altogether.


      5. Physics 4.14: if there were no νοῦς would there be time?
In the following passage from Physics 4.14 Aristotle argues that time would not
exist in the absence of beings who can count:

    One might ﬁnd it a difﬁcult question, whether if there were no soul
    there would be time or not. For if it is impossible that there should be


                                         188
            ARISTOTLE ON PERCEPTION AND COGNITION

    something to do the counting, it is also impossible that anything should
    be countable, so that it is clear that there would be no number either, for
    number is either that which has been counted or that which can be. But if
    there is nothing that has it in its nature to count except soul, and of soul
    [the part which is] intellect, then it is impossible that there should be time
    if there is no soul, except that there could be what underlies time; as for
    example if it is possible for there to be motion without soul. The before
    and after are in motion, and time is these qua countable.
                                                          (Phys. 4.14.223a21–29)

As I said at the outset, this passage might tempt one to think that the perception
of time depends on counting since the existence of time depends on the existence
of beings who can count.41 Since perceiving something presupposes its existence,
if nows were brought into existence by the act of counting,42 this would seem to
have some plausibility, since acts of perception would depend on acts of counting.
And since it also seems plausible to assume that these acts must take place in the
same mind, it would have the consequence that no being could perceive time that
could not count. But Aristotle is very clear in the De Memoria that animals that
are unable to count can perceive time.
   If, however, nows are already there for us to perceive as suggested by Phys-
ics 263a27–8, 263b3–6, or it is only necessary to mark nows off perceptually for
them to exist, then no such problem arises. Then, if we assume that perceiving
something presupposes its existence, the perception of time would depend coun-
terfactually only on the existence of beings who can count, which does not require
beings who perceive time to be able to count. In fact, it does not require beings
who perceive time, or the before and after in motion qua countable, to perceive
time as countable.
   Still, the mind dependence of time implied by this passage has seemed to many
a philosophical mistake, either due to a straightforward logical error43 or a confu-
sion about modality.44 But, assuming that deliberative φαντασία produces a per-
ceptually normalized image of a day in the perceiver, and only beings with νοῦς
have deliberative φαντασία, we can infer a similar conclusion about the measur-
ability of time, that is, that in the absence of beings with νοῦς, time would not be
measurable (or countable in the extended sense of time being countable by means
of some determinate time discussed at Physics 4.14.223b13).
   In Metaphysics Δ 15, Aristotle says that what are measurable, or knowable, or
thinkable, or visible are called relatives, not because they are called just what they
are of something else but because something else, that is, a measure or knowledge
or thought or sight, is called just what it is of them. I take it that the difference is
that a measure is deﬁnitionally and intrinsically related to the measurable, while
the measurable is not similarly related to the measure, and as a consequence,
while the measure cannot be but described as a measure, the measurable admits
of other descriptions. Categories 7 tells us that the correct way of talking about
the measurable in relation to the measure is not to say that the measurable is


                                         189
                                     JOHN BOWIN

measurable of the measure, but that the measurable is measurable by the measure
(6b28–6b36). This use of the instrumental dative is familiar from Physics 4: “each
thing is counted by some one thing of the same kind (units by a unit, horses by a
horse), and therefore time too by some determinate time” (Physics 4.14.223b13–
15). The measure, then, by being only an instrument of the measurable’s measur-
ability, is only incidentally related to the measurable.
    Since the measure is only incidentally related to the measurable, this shows
that there is another contingency we might consider in connection with the coun-
terfactual in Physics 4.14.223a21–29, viz., the absence of the measure by which
the measurable is measured. Now clearly, there are some cases where the measure
will never be absent. For example, pluralities of horses will always have a meas-
ure available to count them because every horse in the plurality will stand in the
required relation to the plurality. In general, discrete pluralities of substances are
always measurable because their mere existence entails the existence of an intrin-
sically indivisible measure that they stand in the required relation to.
    But continuous magnitudes, however, will not always be measurable in this
sense. This is because no part of a continuous magnitude, such as time and
motion, is intrinsically indivisible. Continuous magnitudes are only indivisible in
relation to perception (MetA.I.1.1053a1, 23), which means that they can only be
measured by a measure that appears indivisible to a being capable of perceiving
it. Or perhaps I should say “imagining” since we know from De Memoria 2 that
the measure by which we have a determinate cognition of the time as being, for
example, this or that many days, is an “inner movement” or a φαντάσμα; a nor-
malized φαντάσμα of a day synthesized from multiple φαντάσματα by delibera-
tive φαντασία. So then, in a world without beings possessing νοῦς, and, therefore,
deliberative φαντασία, time would not be measurable because no measure would
stand in a measuring relation to it, nor would it be countable in the extended sense
of time being countable by means of some determinate time.


                                           Notes
 1 DA 3.4, 429b18 ff.; Mem. 1, 449b31–450a7; Post. An. 1.5, 74a32–74b4; Metaph. M 3,
   1077b17 ff.; Phys. 2.2, 193b24–194a7.
 2 This translation, with minor modiﬁcations, is from Ziolkowski (2002).
 3 This translation, with minor modiﬁcations, is from Todd (1996). “At once turned front
   and back” is from Homer, Il. 1.343, 3.109.
 4 As Sorabji (2004, pp. XXII-XXIII) points out in the case of Themistius.
 5 Here the word νοῦς is being used in Aristotle’s broad sense of “that whereby the soul thinks
   (διανοεῖται) and judges (ὑπολαμβάνει)” (DA 3.4, 429a23) rather than in the narrow sense
   of that whereby the soul grasps the principles of a demonstration (Post. An. 2.19, 100b15).
 6 For a modern example of this sort of interpretation, see Gregoric (2007, p. 104–5),
   who seeks to block the inference that the common sense perceives time by claiming
   that perceiving number and motion is not sufﬁcient for perceiving time. According to
   Gregoric, one also must be able to count nows in order to perceive time.
 7 For a survey of the controversy, see White (1993, pp. 174–182). On Aristotelian arith-
   metic, see also Mignucci (1987).


                                            190
            ARISTOTLE ON PERCEPTION AND COGNITION

 8 On number as countable see Phys. 4.11, 219b6–7; 4.14, 223a24–25, 223b13–16; Met-
   aph. Δ 6, 1016b9–11; K 10, 1066b25–26). On number as a plurality of objects studied
   qua indivisible see Metaph. M 3.
 9 Translations of Aristotle’s Physics, in this chapter are, with minor modiﬁcations, from
   Hussey (1983).
10 See Sorabji (2004, p. XXII) and Kahn (1966, p. 53, n. 23).
11 This is Sorabji’s interpretation. See Sorabji (2004, p. XXIII).
12 See Coope (2005, pp. 9–13; ch. 5, esp. pp. 89–92).
13 At Physics 8.8, 263a27–8, and 263b3–6, Aristotle clearly envisages the traversal of an
   inﬁnite number of things that exist potentially rather than a potentially inﬁnite number
   of things. Otherwise, he would not be showing, as he says he is, how in a way it is pos-
   sible and in a way it is impossible to get entirely through an inﬁnite number of things.
14 Beare (1906, p. 286 ff.), Kahn (1966, p. 46), and Block (1960, p. 94) take this to imply
   that incidental perception is a performance of intellect.
15 Cashdollar (1973, p. 163).
16 Thus, Caston (1996, p. 42) is right to claim that incidental sensibles may involve
   the cooperation of intellect in humans, but it is not an essential feature of incidental
   perception.
17 On perceiving φαντάσματα, see Mem.1.450b17–18.
18 For example, by Coope (2005) and by Sorabji (1983, p. 84 ff.).
19 Of the remaining two, one expresses the odd idea that insofar as the now counts, it is a
   number (4.11, 220a22) and another extends the sense of ἀριθμεῖν to mean time meas-
   urement (4.14, 223b13. More on this later).
20 In this, Aristotle recognizes what has been rigorously demonstrated only in the 20th
   century, that is, that humans and many other animals have a modicum of perceptual
   numerical competence. In particular, it has been shown by cognitive scientists that
   both infant and adult humans, as well as many other animals, including birds, ﬁsh, and
   various other mammals, have the ability to accurately and non-verbally assess the car-
   dinality of sets of objects or events of up to about three or four members. This, called
   “subitizing”, is done by keeping track of individual elements in the sets, probably by
   using discrete perceptual representations. It has also been shown that many animals
   also have a non-verbal ability to roughly discriminate the relative size of larger cardi-
   nalities, and that a few have the ability to grasp ordinal relations within ordered sets of
   up to about seven items. See Nieder (2005).
21 Top. 6.5.142b26 says that only humans are able to count.
22 There are 22 occurrences of the verb μετρεῖν in chapters 12–14, nearly twice as many
   occurrences as ἀριθμεῖν in the whole of Aristotle’s discussion of time.
23 This translation, with minor modiﬁcations, is from Sorabji (2004, pp. 57–58).
24 EN.7.3.1147b5.
25 Sorabji (2004, p. 70).
26 cf. Irwin (1988, p. 316).
27 cf. Taormina (2002, p. 38); King (2009, p. 65).
28 I assume that, as at Mem.1.451a3, the κινήσεις in Mem.2.452b8–453a4 are φαντάσματα.
29 Mem.1.450a9–11 seems also to point to this conclusion, but the text less clear. Here,
   the received text says, “Now, one must apprehend magnitude and motion by means of
   the same thing by which one apprehends time; and τὸ φάντασμα is an affection of the
   common sense” (Mem.1.450a9–11). In the preceding lines Aristotle has implied that
   magnitudes are apprehended by means of φαντάσματα, so the thought here seems to be
   that time is apprehended by means of φαντάσματα too. It can also, perhaps, be inferred
   from Aristotle’s remark that we cannot think of anything without a continuum or think
   of non-temporal things without time that the reason for these two claims is the same,
   that is, that φαντάσματα must be involved.


                                            191
                                      JOHN BOWIN

30 The following passages characterize φαντασία as a faculty for the retention of percep-
   tual representations: DA.3.3.429a1–2; Insomn.1.459–a17–18); Rhet.1.11.1370a27.
31 Cf. Caston (1996, p. 42), who takes Mem. 1, 450a9–11, which implies that magnitudes
   are apprehended by means of φαντάσματα, to suggest that φαντασία is involved in the
   perception of common sensibles. Caston also thinks that De Anima 3.3.428b18–25
   implicates φαντασία in special, common, and incidental perception.
32 The specious present is “the short duration of which we are immediately and inces-
   santly sensible” (James 1905, p. 631). Sorabji (2004, p. 91) tentatively detects the
   concept of a specious present in Aristotle’s use of the aorist ἔπαθε at Mem.2.451a31,
   but this, as Sorabji recognizes, is uncorroborated in any of Aristotle’s other discussions
   of time.
33 The phrase is at De Int. 1, 16a18 and is difﬁcult to interpret. Charlton suggests that it
   distinguishes between untensed and tensed uses of verbs (Charlton 2000, p. 64, n. 30).
   Ackrill dismisses this as an unsupported conjecture, but offers the even more difﬁcult
   reading of a distinction between present uses of verbs on the one hand, and past and
   future uses of verbs on the other (Ackrill 1963, p. 115). Pseudo-Philoponus’ reading
   seems even more improbable.
34 Philoponus, J. 1897, 580,27–37. This translation, with minor modiﬁcations, is from
   (Charlton 2000, p. 31).
35 Aristotle also seems to say that we do not perceive the past either at Mem.1.449b27.
   Taormina makes much of this (Taormina 2002, pp. 46–49), but if this claim is strictly
   maintained, it will make nonsense of the account of perceiving time in Physics 4.11,
   which requires perceiving at least some motion phases (or qua countable, nows) as past.
36 This translation, with minor modiﬁcations, is from Hamlyn (1993, pp. 71–72).
37 Pace for example, Polansky (2007, p. 530) and Moss (2012, p. 146), who insist that
   deliberative φαντασία is distinguished from perceptual φαντασία only by the use to
   which it is put. But I maintain, as I shall explain later, that there is a difference in phe-
   nomenal content, though not one that requires deliberative φαντασία to be conceptual.
38 Although these people are called μνημονικοὶ instead ἀναμνηστικοί, the refer-
   ence is clearly to mnemonic systems used by ἀναμνηστικοί (cf. Top. 8.14.163b28;
   Mem.2.452a12; Insomn.1.458b20). Recollecting is described in De Memoria as a
   συλλογισμός τίς along with deliberation and is said to belong only to those animals
   (i.e., humans) possessing a deliberative faculty (βουλευτικὸν) (Mem.2.453a5–13).
39 Similarly, Michael Tye argues that while concepts might be involved in perceptually
   disambiguating a ﬁgure with an ambiguous decomposition into spatial parts, such as
   the two faces-vase ﬁgure, the resulting phenomenal content may remain, nonetheless,
   non-conceptual (Tye 1995, pp. 140–141).
40 For the epexegetical reading, see Sorabji (1993, p. 34). For the corrective reading, and
   a survey of the interpretative possibilities, see McKirihan (1992, p. 243).
41 Even though the counterfactual contemplated is one where there is no soul simpliciter,
   the argument that there would be no time in this case relies on only the assumption that
   there is no νοῦς or intellect.
42 As suggested by Coope (2005). See endnote 12.
43 Mignucci (1987, pp. 184–186).
44 Sorabji (1983, p. 89 ff.)

                                      Bibliography
Ackrill, J. L. (1963) Aristotle: Categories and De Interpretatione. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Beare, J. I. (1906) Greek Theories of Elementary Cognition. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Block, I. (1960) Aristotle and the physical object. Philosophy and Phenomenological
  Research 21: 93–101.


                                             192
            ARISTOTLE ON PERCEPTION AND COGNITION

Cashdollar, S. (1973) Aristotle’s account of incidental perception. Phronesis 18: 156–175.
Caston, V. (1996) Why Aristotle needs imagination. Phronesis 41: 20–55.
Charlton, W. (2000) ‘Philoponus’, on Aristotle on the Soul 3.9–13 with Stephanus on Aris-
  totle on Interpretation. London: Duckworth.
Coope, U. (2005) Time for Aristotle: Physics IV.11–14. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gregoric, P. (2007) Aristotle on the Common Sense. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hamlyn, D. W. (1993) Aristotle De Anima, Books II and III (with Passages from Book I),
  translated with Introduction and Notes by D.W. Hamlyn, with a Report on Recent Work
  and a Revised Bibliography by Christopher Shields. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hussey, E. (1983) Aristotle’s Physics III & IV. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Irwin, T. (1988) Aristotle’s First Principles. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
James, W. (1905) The Principles of Psychology. Vol. 1. New York: Henry Holt and Company.
Kahn, C. H. (1966) Sensation and consciousness in Aristotle’s psychology. Archiv für
  Geschichte der Philosophie 48: 43–81.
King, R. A. H. (2009) Aristotle and Plotinus on Memory (Quellen und Studien zur Philoso-
  phie 94). Berlin and New York: Walter de Gruyter.
Magnus, A. (1890) Liber de memoria et reminiscentia. In Borgnet, A. (ed.) Opera Omnia,
  t. IX. Paris: Vives, pp. 97–118.
Mckirihan, R. (1992) Principles and Proofs: Aristotle’s Theory of Demonstrative Science.
  Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Mignucci, M. (1987) Aristotle’s arithmetic. In Graese, A. (ed.) Mathematics and Meta-
  physics in Aristotle: Akten des X. Symposium Aristotelicum. Bern: Haupt, pp. 175–211.
Moss, J. (2012) Aristotle on the Apparent Good: Perception, Phantasia, Thought, and
  Desire. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nieder, A. (2005) Counting on neurons: The neurobiology of numerical competence.
  Nature Reviews Neuroscience 6: 177–190.
Philoponus, J. (1897) In Aristotelis de anima libros commentaria. In Hayduck, M. (ed.)
  Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca. Berlin: Reimer, p. 15.
Polansky, R. (2007) Aristotle’s De Anima. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Quine, W. V. O. (1960) Word and Object. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Sorabji, R. (2004) Aristotle on Memory. 2nd edn. London: Duckworth.
———. (1993) Animal Minds and Human Morals: The Origins of the Western Debate.
  London: Duckworth.
———. (1983) Time, Creation and the Continuum: Theories in Antiquity and the Early
  Middle Ages. London: Duckworth.
Taormina, D. (2002) Perception du temps et mémoire chez Aristote: De memoria et remi-
  niscentia 1. Philosophie Antique 2: 34–61.
Themistius (1899) In libros Aristotelis de anima paraphrasis. In Heinze, R. (ed.) Commen-
  taria in Aristotelem Graeca. Berlin: Reimer, p. 5.3.
Todd, R. (1996) Themistius: On Aristotle’s on the Soul. London: Duckworth.
Tye, M. (1995) Ten Problems of Consciousness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
White, M. J. (1993) The metaphysical location of Aristotle’s Μαθηματιϰά. Phronesis 38
  (2): 166–182.
Ziolkowski, J. M. (2002) Albertus Magnus, commentary on Aristotle, on memory and rec-
  ollection. In Carruthers, M., and Ziolkowski, J. M. (eds.) The Medieval Craft of Mem-
  ory: An Anthology of Text and Pictures. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press,
  pp. 118–152.



                                          193
