   Uncomfortable
    Situations
Emotion between Science and the Humanities


           DANIEL M. GROSS




          The University of Chicago Press
              Chicago and London
The Universit)' of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637
The University of Chicago Press. Ltd., London
e 2017 by The University of Chicago
All rights r~rved. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner
whatsoever without written permission, except in the case of brief quotations in
critical articles and reviews. For more information, contact the University of Chicago
Press, 1427 E. 60th St., Chicago, IL 60637.
Published 2017
Primed in the United States of America

26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17        I 2   3 4 5

ISBN-13: 978-0-226-48503-4 (cloth)
1su;-i3: 978-0-226-48517-1 (e-book)
001: 10.7208/chicago/9780226485171.001.0001

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Names: Gross, Daniel M., 1965- author. I Preston, Stephanie D. (Stephanie Delphine)
Title: Uncomfortable situations : emotion between science and the humani1ies /
  Daniel M. Gross.
Description: Chicago; London : The University of Chicago Press, 2017. I Includes
  bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016055406 I 1saN 9780226485034 (cloth: alk. paper) I
  ISBN 9780226485171 (e-book)
Subjects: LCSH: Emotions in literature. I English literature- 19th century-History
  and criticism. I English literature- 18th century- History and criticism. I Darwin,
  Charles, 1809-1881- Expression of the emotions in man and animals. I Equiano,
  Olaudah, 1745-1797. Interesting narrative of the life ofOlaudah Equiano. I
  Radcliffe, Ann Ward, 1764-1823. Romance of the forest. I Austen, Jane, 1775 - 1817.
  Sense and sensibility. I Emotions (Philosophy). I Psychology and literature. I
  Neurosciences and the humanities.
Classification: LCC PRl49,ESS c76 2017 I DDC 820.9/353-dc23 LC record available at
  https://lccn.loc.gov/2016o55406

©This paper meets the requirements of ANs1/N1so z39.48-1992 (Permanence
of Paper).
                                    Contents




                               Ack,iow/edgments v11

               1 N T Ro o u c T I o N    Uncomfortable Situations 1

  1       Defending the Humanities with Charles Darwin's The Expression
                    of the Emotio11s in Man a11d A11ima/s 28
      2    Bearing Up in The Interesting Narrative of the Life o/O/audah
                   Eq11iano, or Gustavus Vassa, the African 52
3 Hostile Environments in Ann Radcliffe's The Romance of the Forest 77
           4 Mixed Feelings in Jane Austen's Se11se a11d Sensibility 111

                   E P I Lo G u E Irreconcilable Differences?
                          (With Stephanie Preston) 129


                                        Notes 147
                                        Index 175
                            Acknowledgments




As a sequel of sorts to The Secret History of Emotion, this book is particularly
indebted to a series of conversations that advanced my thinking substantially.
Darwin material became the foothold for this book after my UC Irvine col-
league, Jonathan Alexander, asked me to develop something surprising for
a local symposium on work across the sciences and the humanities. Sub-
sequently the Darwin piece was published in Critical Inquiry 37, no.1 (2010)
and the book project launched, but only after thoughtful feedback from
cross-disciplinary gatherings at the University of Waterloo, the University of
Pittsburgh, and the University of Manitoba. Lauren Berlant, who edited my
Darwin article, has been instrumental as I developed this project in a world
now familiar with Emotion Studies thanks, in part, to her efforts.
    My chapter on Gibson and Gothic environments shaped up in collabora-
tion with my UCI colleagues Julia Lupton and Jayne Lewis, both of whom
read heaps of preliminary material that I designed with their sensibilities in
mind. I thank participants in my graduate seminars Cognitive Approaches to
Literature (2012) and Affect Criticism (2016), who helped me figure out how
the book project might arrive on the scene. Particular insights are due to a
few of these individuals: Brendan Shapiro alerted me to the work of David
Herman, Maureen Fitzsimmons reminded me about Kahneman's relevance
to literature, Jens Lloyd paid special attention to environmental details in
Radcliffe and Austen, and Elizabeth Mathews got me thinking about "emo-
tional taste" and its implications for literary history. Audiences at the Modern
Language Association Conference, the National Communication Association
Conference, and Case Western Reserve University were particularly helpful
as I developed ideas in this portion of the book.
    My chapter on mixed feelings in Austen benefited from conversations
vtii                                                   A C KNOWLEDGM EN TS

around visits to UCLA and Northwestern University, and from the remark-
able cross-disciplinary UC Irvine Persuasion Conference 2016, also organized
by Jonathan Alexander.
    Not surprisingly the epilogue of this book is indebted first to coauthor
Stephanie Preston, who has served as a challenging interlocutor periodically,
going back to our days at the University of Iowa when we met in 2003 pre-
paring for our conference The Promise of Empathy. An earlier version of
this chapter was published in a book I coedited with Frank Biess, Science
 and Emotion after 1945: A Transatlantic Perspective. Frank was a catalyst as
 I worked out the methodology for Uncomfortable Situations in response to
 the UC San Diego History of Emotions conference he organized. Also at the
 conference I met William Reddy, who has subsequently shaped m y work as a
 formidable fellow traveler in the subfield.
     Broad support and close reading was provided by Thomas Rickert, Steve
 Mailloux, Jami Bartlett, Jim Steintrager, and Irene Tucker. Libby Catchings
 taught me a great deal about prosthetic emotion, and she provided expert
 research assistance as a number of images were wrangled into place. Thanks
 also to Will Jones for his work on the recalcitrant McDonald's Happy Meal
 image. At the University of Chicago Press, Douglas Mitchell conti nues to
 provide an extraordinary venue for publications in rhetorical studies. Finally,
 thanks to my family for their ongoing interest in, and forbearance toward,
 my academic work. It should go without saying that this project in Emotion
 Studies would not be the same without the people who surround me. For that
 I am grateful.
                            INTRODUCTION


                       Uncomfortable Situations




Imagine this scenario that comes from the cognitive science literature:

   You're at a dinner party with friends. A debate about a contentious issue arises
   that gets everyone at the table talking. You alone bravely defend the unpopu-
   lar view. Your comments are met with sudden uncomfortable silence. Your
   friends are looking down at their plates, avoiding eye contact with you. You
   feel your chest tighten. 1

Despite myself and what should be the numbing familiarity that comes with
rereading, this passage does make me feel uncomfortable. In this situation
would I be angry at myself for going out on a limb, or fearful that my friends
might distance themselves further? I don't know. I guess it depends upon the
situation that would need more Austenesque details about my relationship to
interested onlookers and the view I defended. In fact it's not hard to imagine a
scenario where along with isolation fears, and anger at myself, I feel pride for
defending the unpopular view to the point where I discover that my friends
aren't friends at all ... now also indignation and perhaps sadness. This kind
of event, in other words, need not unfold with me feeling mixed in the midst
of a stable situation; the event could find me resolute, with those around me
appearing one way or another. Then how do we understand the feelings that
were supposed to be friendly? Basic emotions slip away as we stumble over
voice: appearing to whom? Are feelings prior to the event somehow unfelt
retroactively, just as Lady Russell in Austen's Persuasion must "learn to feel
that she had been mistaken" about Anne's suitors Elliot and Wentworth?2
Though melodramatic in this opening instance, such discomfort in the midst
of a dynamic situation is familiar, even commonplace.
    Another important complication lies at the heart of this opening scenario
2                                                             INTROD U C TION

from the cognitive science literature. Again with Austen, it's worth pointing
out that my mixed feelings would be determined not by any predictable cal-
culation internal to the scene as we imagine it arm's-length on the page, or on
stage, or on screen. Mixed feelings are determined with respect to audiences
who might be outside the immediate situation, including you. Whereas Lau-
 ren Berlant defines a situation as "the state of things in which something that
will perhaps matter is unfolding amidst the usual activity of life," pointing
 in Cmel Optimism to the situation comedy or the police procedural- "We
 have a situation here" 3- I will instead emphasize in this book how a situa-
 tion is characterized by emotional instability defined rhetorically, which is
how you and I appear on the scene. Methodologically, we can't get at the
uncomfortable situation adequately without a rhetoric of audience invest-
 ments, as I will illustrate over the course of this study; and along th e way it
should become evident how this approach differs from its closest neighbors
 (like Sigmund Freud on psychoanalytic ambivalence, Erving Go ffman on so-
ciological uneasiness, and Martin Heidegger on the philosophical bad mood,
 Verstimmung, when everyday concerns go awry). It is also why sentimental
 literature, not television, provides for my study the optimal research domain:
 the genre was characterized by its rhetoric of emotional instability, as I will
 explain focusing on an example from Sterne. 4 Sentimental literature around
 the turn of the eighteenth century shows in appropriate detail how - despite
 the optimism analyzed by Berlant, and which I explore across a handful of
 disciplines-situations are basically uncomfortable.
     Or to put this another way-and responding to James Chandler's im-
 portant work on the topic, sentimental literature establishes the norms for
well-being we still reference when gauging an emotional reaction like those
above.5 The way Chandler tells the story, Adam Smith makes the key move
when he stipulates that sympathy is not feeling what another person feels,
but rather feeling what we ourselves should feel in a like situation. T his philo-
sophical ethics in turn makes room for the "sentimental moment in the his-
tory of fiction" (302) when Laurence Sterne plays a crucial role, as he develops
novelistic techniques for triangulating emotional situations so that immedi-
ate reactions, or na"ive sentimentalism, have their moment, but always invite
their qualification or indeed their very undoing when the "syntax" of the
sentimental moment is revealed-a move mastered later by Blake (277).6
Chandler then argues that this perspective-taking on emotional situations is
precisely what defines the sentimental mode that persists through its crucial
reinvention by Frank Capra's classic cinema where America's intimate public
sphere takes new form: "Adam Smith Goes to Hollywood" (13).
     Chandler tells a compelling origin story. But his ultimate focus on the
UN C OMFORTAllLE. SIT U ATIONS                                                 3

spectator guides his analysis in a different direction, away from the situation
per se, where his spectator is supposed to feel one way or another. Instead I
posit the sentimental moment in the history of fiction initiates what we now
understand as our basic situation, which is supposed to be comfortable if
we follow key literature across the disciplines, but appears anything but if
we return to the formative moment and see how the terms of our comfort
take shape polemically. So instead of an archaeology of sympathy, one might
call this a critical history of well-being, where sentimental literature of the
eighteenth century provides the pivot point.
     At this point I should explain how this book has emerged out of my ear-
lier critique of emotion science that left little room for the cross-disciplinary
conversation I now find essential. In 2006 I offered The Secret History ofEmo-
tion: From A ristotle's Rhetoric to Modem Brain Science as a contribution to a
humanities, and more exactly a rhetorical critique of emotion science as it
had emerged powerfully in the academic and popular presses. My objective
was three-fold . First, I wanted to demonstrate how the new brain science
of emotion doesn't account for basic phenomena that are situated beyond
individuals, for instance the emotional response to Princess Diana's death
lost on a su fferi ng nobody. Second, I wanted to show how the tradition after
Aristotle's R hetoric offers alternatives for understanding emotions as social
phenomena, which is something that leading humanists like Martha Nuss-
baum and Richard Sorabji should have remembered as they rushed toward
the latest brain science. Third, I tried to show how the foundations of modern
brain science emerged in early modern Europe precisely at the expense of this
rhetorical tradition that continues to linger suggestively in our background.
     Unsurprisingly, I was then challenged by simple questions: "Are you anti-
science?" and "Can't there be a worthwhile science of emotion?" In 2006, it
did seem a polemic was called for in the face of overwhelming odds. There was
little room for qualification and common ground because my critique might
then wind up looking like science-humanities "consilience" along the lines
of E. 0. Wilson and Steven Pinker, which makes room for the humanities
only insofar as they are dependent upon scientific inquiry. Passions needed
stirring; some outrage woven through the genealogy seemed the only way
to break through, especially to academic humanists who were making room
for scientific programs that could overwhelm. Nevertheless, this legitimate
challenge stuck with me, and since then I have been working on a response.
Now both within and without brain science, critiques complementing mine
are more firmly established as I'll demonstrate, which makes new room for
cross-disciplinary work of a different sort: I'm referring most prominently
to a "situated emotion" critique of the basic emotions program mentioned
4                                                              INTRODU C TION

above, a "situated cognition" critique of computational psychology, and a
critique of evolutionary psychology from many angles, including cognitive
scientific. So, yes, I now agree, from the perspective of uncompromised hu-
manities inquiry, there is a worthwhile science of emotion.
     In their 2009 Cambridge Handbook of Situated Cognitio11 chapter titled
"Emotions in the Wild," philosophers of science Paul Griffiths and Andrea
Scarantino start to map, by way of omission, the potential contribution of
the humanities to a science of emotion. 7 Drawing heavily on transactional ac-
counts of emotion proposed by some contemporary psychologists, Griffiths
 and Scarantino shift our theoretical focus from terrible snakes and bawling
 babies to what they consider neglected phenomena like a wedding ceremony,
 where the "cultural scaffolding of emotional performances" (445) obviously
 exceeds individual feelings and instead supports the right emotions at the
 right times necessary for society to "function smoothly." Among other fac-
 tors, they are interested in the transactional character of emotion (sulking to
 get a better deal in a relationship, 440 ), material factors, including emotional
 capital (resources associated with having a specific social status, gender, etc.,
 444), emotional affordances (the wedding ceremony itself, the venue . . . ),
 and emotional indeterminacy in the art of misleading others and precipitat-
 ing context-dependent disambiguation-a capacity without which human
 communication and most wedding ceremonies would look very different
 indeed.
     But when we want to model the cognitive dynamics of emotion ecologi-
cally, narrative literature, including fiction, has a special appeal beyond the
social sciences. Take love, to continue the example beyond sentimental lit-
erature, in the context of marriage. For example, the Much Ado about Noth -
ing wedding ceremony of Beatrice and Benedick is perversely shaped by the
insinuation that these sometimes rivals were too proud to love one another.
Could this emotional situation be characterized adequately without the at-
tending fiction that shows how love emerges in this case from a contrary
impulse? Although cultural anthropology can rival narrative literature as
thick description, it is obligated to what Clifford Geertz calls "concrete social
events and occasions" 8 to a degree that precludes ecocriticism of the rhetori-
cal sort I'll practice in chapter 4, referencing James J. Gibson. Or turning to a
foundational work of sentimental fiction, where I spend most of my time in
this project, consider the double wedding ceremony in Sarah Fielding's 1744
novel, The Adventures of David Simple: Containing an Account of His Trav-
els through the Cities of London and Westminster, in Search of a Real Friend. 9
In this scene, risque French romances provide some of what Griffiths and
UN C OMl'ORTAlll.E    SITUATIONS

Scarantino call the "cultural scaffolding of emotional performances" against
which Fielding writes, when she explicitly refuses to describe the beauties of
nature that adorn the heroes and heroines, choosing instead to reacquaint
readers with the world-contrary "minds" of the key characters, according to
which their oddly benevolent schemes of life might be followed (236-238).
Where in the Cambridge Handbook Lawrence Barsalou admits, "the situations
that pervade cognition are open ended and difficult to enumerate" (256), I
agree, suggesting more optimistically that literature including nonfiction like
Equiano's Interesting Narrative, and then differently the sentimental novel,
can help us understand how situations take shape. Let me illustrate by way of
a thought experiment, otherwise known as a very modest work of narrative
fiction again focused on love.
      An alien visitor after the apocalypse wants to figure out what humans
meant by " romantic love." Perhaps something might be learned about love
by putting a couple of ratty survivors in a room together and watching them
for a long while. But perhaps not, or not much. Alternatively the alien might
read Steven Pinker on the topic but wouldn't learn much beyond what sup-
posedly happened over 10,000 years ago, if anything romantic happened at
all. 10 A good historical dictionary definition would help, though the required
abstraction would also distance the alien; remember that OED definitions
build up inductively by way of direct quotations from the literature that pro-
vides the context for interpretation. In fact our alien, like the historian Law-
rence Stone, could do worse than to learn about romantic love by reading
a bunch of romances and novels (i.e., beyond the early eighteenth-century
sense of French " romance" mentioned by Fielding). And why is that? Because
romances and novels in Stone's largely eighteenth-century European reper-
toire show how romantic love works ecologically, including for Stone love at
first sight (what might now be called a cognitive-perceptual phenomenon),
love above all other considerations including material (i.e., love as a cogni-
tive evaluation), and love as an admirable personal emotion given full rein
"no matter how exaggerated and absurd the resulting conduct may appear to
others." 11 Let's call this love a marginally acceptable antisocial stance that may
be head over heels, or upside down. Second, romances and novels provide
a concrete sense for the historicity of romantic love. "No doubt," qualifies
Stone, certain young people have always defied the conventional wisdom that
condemns such mental disturbances and have fallen head over heels in love
(282 ). But it wasn't until the later European eighteenth century that Stone
sees the growth of marriage for love-instead of marriage for interest-as
a respectable motive among the propertied classes, accompanied by a ris-
6                                                               INTRODU C TION

ing flood of novels devoted to the same theme (284). And though Stone's
argument was subject to vigorous criticism, which has typically relied upon
 counterevidence that would qualify his more dramatic claims about histori-
 cal change,12 Stone's basic methodology that includes the study of literature
 remains very appealing to anyone-including aliens or us-interested in the
 history of emotion.
      More recently in The Making of Romantic Love: Longing and Sexuality i11
 Europe, South Asia & Japan, 900 -1200 CE, leading historian of emotion Wil-
 liam M. Reddy has refined a methodology that includes a wide range of liter-
  ary artifacts as they speak to the relevant sciences of emotion, and he dates
  the phenomenon earlier because he is less interested in romantic love as the
  emotional cornerstone of a new social order with companionate marriage at
  its center, and more interested in romantic love appearing as a specifically
  Western and Western-influenced alternative to desire-as-appetite, especially
  as this model of desire was canonized in the Gregorian Reform of approxi-
  mately 1050-1200 (17, 26).13 Like Stone (and our alien), Reddy looks for his
  evidence amongst "love literatures and documents" (9); but unlike Stone,
  Reddy references the latest cognitive science and psychology as he explains
  why literature is relevant beyond what one might find in the brain-focused
  laboratory. An emotion like romantic love, according to Reddy, is a phenom-
  enon instantiated by its expression as it "enhances the background activation
  level of that range of thought material that is the emotion" (8 ); "I love you" as
  an emotive does not merely describe some preexisting condition, it instanti-
  ates the emotion and it does so unpredictably because the outcome (and I
  would add given the following example from Sterne, the intention) is not
  certain. So for Reddy, love literatures provide essential materials for a study
 on romantic love because that is precisely where an emotive like the declara-
 tion of love appears through its "material": its generic and social viability,
 its concrete opportunity, its deployment, its precise form, its receptions. At
 this moment cognitive behavioral therapy appears for Reddy as he tries to
 explain how such an emotion is experienced. But his point about emotional
 unpredictability and the "situated-ness" (27) of sexual desire establish what
 sort of brain science won't help in this instance and others like it. "There is,
 therefore, nothing in the latest neuroscience research on sexual desire, sexual
arousal, or romantic love that permits one to conclude these states are caused
or orchestrated by hard-wired brain systems. Instead, the most sophisticated
methods presently available yield results that are compatible with the idea of
a substantial role for cultural determinants in the occurrence of and the expe-
rience of such states. This conclusion is consistent with trends in many other
UNCOMPORTAllLE SITUATIONS                                                                7

areas of cognitive neuroscience ... " (15). Complementing the work of a his-
torian of emotion like Reddy, my perspective throughout this project is that
a specific kind of cognitive science research-the situated variety-provides
the best point of contact for humanities work on emotion.


                              A Sentimental Journey

Now, my central examples from Sterne. As the very title suggests, Laurence
Sterne's A Sentimental Journey through France and Italy (1768) is a masterful
study of emotional situations of a certain sort, namely sentimental. The best
way to see how this works, not surprisingly, is to read one of the emotional
situations we find there, and characteristically, few situations in Sterne go
without their own reflections built-in, without "commentary upon the text,"
as Yorick will actually say in the passage itself. The setting: protagonist and
Sterne alter-ego Yorick, having just arrived in Calais on his way to Paris, finds
himself face -to-face with a lady he had noticed earlier, and he takes her hand:

   THIS certainly, fair lady! said I, raising her hand up a little lightly as I began,
   must be one of Fo rtune's whimsical doings: to take two utter strangers by
   their hands - of different sexes, and perhaps from different corners of the
   globe, and in one moment place them together in such a cordial situation as
   Friendship herself could scarce have achieved for them, had she projected it
   for a month -
       - And your reflection upon it, shows how much, Monsieur, she has em-
   barrassed you by the adventure.-
       When the situation is what we would wish, nothing is so ill-timed as to
   hint at the circumstances which make it so. You thank Fortune, continued
   she- you had reason - the heart knew it, and was satisfied; and who but an
   English philosopher would have sent notices of it to the brain to reverse the
   judgment?
        In saying this she disengaged her hand with a look which I thought a suf-
   ficient commentary upon the text.
        It is a miserable picture which I am going to give of the weakness of my
   heart, by owning that it suffered a pain, which worthier occasions could not
   have inflicted.- ! was mortified with the loss of her hand, and the manner in
   which I had lost it carried neither oil nor wine to the wound: I never felt the
   pain of a sheepish inferiority so miserably in my life.
       The triumphs of a true feminine heart are short upon these discomfitures.
   In a very few seconds she laid her hand upon the cuff of my coat, in order
   to finish her reply; so some way or other, God knows how, I regained my
   situation. 14
8                                                               IN T ROD U C TION

 Just so we are clear. Sterne gives us the following situation: 1) Yorick and the
 lady are in a situation together as he grabs her hand; 2) Yorick reflects on
 that "fortunate" situation noting how they are given to each other appro-
 priately: similarly classed we now know as potential friends, and oppositely
 sexed-how romantic. 3) The lady remarks upon his reflection that ruins the
 moment as it draws attention to itself- recalling those English philosophers
 who do so awkwardlyl 5-and she drops his hand immediately. 4) Time is
 then taken to call the situation uncomfortable- soon to be relieved by the
 lady said to be short upon such "discomfiture"-and Yorick claims the situ -
 ation regained by way of the lady's hand but ultimately secured somewhere
 else, "God knows how." So an outside perspective is figured in this passage as
 "worthier occasions" for suffering make a Smith-like appearance; bu t instead
 of Smith, we get all sorts of admitted limitations, set within the frame of a
 colloquial God whose calculations are immeasurable.
      What defines the "situation" in this case? And what would it m ean for
 the situation to be "sentimental"? In fact, "to think of making love by senti-
  ments!" seems to Yorick appalling, or at least this is how he later represents
  it to the lady before she concludes "you have been making love to me all this
  while" (26-27). In other words, yes and no. No, the situation is no t senti-
  mental because it could never be that thing once attention is drawn , which it
  must be from the outset because this is a piece of writing that does nothing
  but draw attention-that's what literature does, after all. T he keywo rd is in
  the title. But yes, the situation is sentimental because the word is in the title,
 and what could be more sentimental than this situation, which must in fact
 be something in the first place, if it can be ruined? When it comes to senti-
 ment who indeed needs the brainy English philosophers or, I would add, the
 brain scientists, when we have Sterne (he seems to say)? In a passage like this,
 Sterne shows us how sentiments work, and he makes it clear this is exactly
 what he is doing as the thing itself-true sentiment-appears by way of its
 negation and thus we are left with only the places where we expect it to be
 generically. That's what defines the situation in this case: a set of romantic
 expectations given appropriately with class and opposite sex at the core, and
 then destroyed by drawing attention to these mundane facts, which leaves the
characters at a loss, and the readers at a loss, as we are somewhat relieved-
comforted-precisely by the expectations that cannot be met. Who, after
all, would find it romantic if sentiments were clear and they added up just
like they were supposed to (also a concern for the post-utilitarian Austen
we will see)? And who would want to read such a story, let alone lead such
a life? Certainly not Sterne himself, who through this work comes to define
the sentimental novel and the very phenomenon-sentimentality-like no-
UN C OMFORTAflLE SITUATIONS                                                   9

 body else besides perhaps Rousseau in France and Goethe in Germany. Alter-
 natively, we can say that Sterne regularly disappoints expectation at the level
of character, and that is how he moves the scene forward; at the same time
Sterne disappoints expectation at the level of the reader ("Where's the senti-
 ment?") and that is how the reader is moved. Utter predictability would never
work. Negation both at the level of semantic values and theology are crucial
 for Sterne's rhetoric of emotion, as I pursue in chapter 1.
     Now after Sterne we can return to the beginning with some notes on
methodology- specifically what my home field in the humanities brings to
 bear. A sign of the times, our opening thought experiment and the initial
anger-or- fear alternative is plucked out of an important 2011 Neuropsycholo-
gia study, "Grounding Emotion in Situated Conceptualization," published by
senior researchers Lawrence Barsalou, Lisa Feldman Barrett, and colleagues.
In that study the researchers set out to critique and provide laboratory evi-
dence refut ing the "basic emotion program" attributed prominently to Paul
Ekman, replacing it with a model where emotion is situated. (On critical
trials during brain scanning, participants rate physical danger and "social
evaluation" situations like the one above.) The effort is important because it
decouples emotion from narrow brain science and evolutionary psychology,
while introducing into the laboratory some noteworthy context variables,
including audience. At the same time the effort is hampered, I'll argue in
chapter 4 and with Stephanie Preston in the epilogue of this book, because
it does not take humanities-based inquiry seriously enough, which leads to
some troubling loose ends we glimpse above. How does one best charac-
terize a laboratory study of emotion in terms of 1) its exigencies like social
improvement, where for instance more empathy is pursued; 2) its key terms
like anger as they impinge upon ordinary language and folk psychology; 3) its
mediation like verbal and visual depiction; and 4) its interpretation, where
causal explanations for the observed phenomena are regularly ventured, and
where rhetorical figuration (like Sterne's negation) directs one beyond the
laboratory? Because emotions cannot be isolated in the laboratory to the
point where these context variables are completely neutralized-not without
losing the phenomenon at hand, for example, anger or fear or empathy-a
contribution from the humanities suggests itself strongly.


                          The Rhetoric of Emotion

Let me be clear. Debating "Emotions: hardwired or socially constructed?" is
distracting because it collapses the phenomenology that is where we in fact
spend most of our time. So to replace this binary debate I offer the follow-
10                                                             INTRODU C TION

ing phenomenology of emotion, which takes shape around certain types of
emotional transactions. Hence we can also call this more exactly a "rhetoric
of emotion" because we are both describing transactions along the lines of
Griffiths and Scarantino, and asserti11g relationships when we take them up in
a certain way. Those relationships can be, for instance, as follows:
      1) Mimetic. In literary criticism what Sianne Ngai summarizes as the "lit-
 erary strategy of sympathy," or a "perfectly symmetrical circuit of affective
 'communication' in which the reader feels what a character feels." 16 Tears
 produce tears, terror produces terror. Analog models in the natural sciences
 include mirror-neuron theory, and some aspects of the theory of how we
 recognize emotion in the face: if we see that someone else looks terrified
 we might feel terrified sympathetically, and for reasons that are biologically
 adaptive because we might very well be terrified of the same thing. Or adap-
  tively once again, we are aligned to the emotions of our close kin like my
  baby, where there is often good reason to feel anger, disgust, fear, happiness,
  sadness, and surprise-sympathetically.
       2) Cathartic. Witnessing emotional situation X can regularly produce in
  us a very different emotion, of a particular sort Y. Consider famously Aristo-
  tle's Poetics where the suffering of Oedipus is supposed to produce a sense of
  pleasant relief in the reader or spectator.
       3) Projective. Here we have, in Ngai's helpful explanation, a subject's
  emotion-based appraisal of an artwork, treated as ifit were an intrinsic prop-
  erty of the work itself. So Mysteries of Udolpho is not intrinsically boring, but
   rather I'm bored (by X) where the properties of X are incidental. In the his-
  tory of aesthetics, this is what Theodor Lipps calls Einfuhlung (translated as
  "empathy") or more literally "feeling-into."
       4) Prosthetic. The object or scene extends our emotional range-for ex-
  ample, the sublime object makes us feel something we could not otherwise.
  Someone suffers in our stead as in the Passion of Christ (1 Peter 3:14, King
  fames version henceforth): "But and if ye suffer for righteousness' sake, happy
  are ye: and be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled; But sanctify the
  Lord God in your hearts: and be ready always to give an answer to every man
 that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you with meekness and fear." 17
      5) Performative. As we have seen, William Reddy offers "I love you" as an
 emotive that does not merely describe some preexisting condition, it instan-
 tiates the emotion and it does so unpredictably because the outcome is not
 certain. So for Reddy, love literatures provide essential materials for a study
 on romantic love because that is where an emotive like the declaration of love
appears through its material: its generic and social viability, its concrete op-
portunity, its deployment, its precise form, its receptions.
UNCOMFOllTA0LE SITU/\TIONS                                                    11


   6 ) Vo/imtnry. This, Philip Fisher argues in The Vehement Passions, 1s
                                                                      18
"where we feel something exactly because the other does not" ( 142). A blank
spot appears where the reader or spectator" volunteers passion, stepping in to
supply the missing fear, grief, shame, or anger" (144). Fisher offers a typical
Jane Austen move where we might feel shame for an action performed by
someone like Darcy "shamelessly." Then finally and most importantly for
my study:
    7) Systematic. Any particular emotion or emotional experience-or for
that matter, a marked non-emotional experience like shamelessness or apa-
thy - appears only as it is part of a system. This can be a political economy
of emotion like we get in Hobbes where emotions like fear and vainglory
are distributed systematically but unevenly across the corporate body. Or it
can be a " theory," as Ngai calls it (84), where feeling systematically produces
the object of experience. For example, Sterne's Sentimental Journey, where
the object of experience and a focalized theory of the sentimental are co-
constitutive, such that the mechanisms of production are themselves appar-
ent. Systematic considerations help us not only to account for emotions in
their positive manifestation, but also to ask how emotions are superseded,
excluded, or otherwise rendered unavailable or beyond the range of immedi-
ate experiential or discourse-analytic possibilities.
    Thus talk about emotions can be confused for a number of reasons, and
the nature-nurture debate is just one of the less interesting. First we get con-
fused because the reference point can shift depending upon context and a set
of related terms: feeling, mood, passion, affect, and emotion-the last two of
which have been set against one another controversially as I will now explain
briefly.
    Considered historically, and occasionally in this book, "affect" can be sim-
ply a synonym for emotion. But from a transdisciplinary perspective, this ter-
minology can be a point of inadvertent, but also sharp, disagreement about
priority. Historically, "affect" can designate a general physiological disposi-
tion that precedes emotion theoretically, temporally, phylogenetically, and/
or ontogenetically. In Shakespeare's Love's Labour's Lost I.i.149 we read "For
euery man with his affectes is borne," but we would not expect to hear that
we are born "angry" let alone "jealous," which are most definitely emotions
in Shakespeare and beyond. From one polemic perspective with historical
roots, affect comes first, and then we grow into emotions as individuals and
as a species. This formulation in more recent scientific psychology considers
affect the experience of a feeling or emotion, and hence it would be some-
thing ( unlike emotion) that we share with lower organisms. 19 According to
Ruth Leys, who has written polemically about this conceptual distinction, the
12                                                                   INTRODU C TION

definition of affect has recently consolidated across some neuroscience and
also some high theory as "independent of, and in an important sense prior
to, ideology-that is, prior to intentions, meanings, reasons, and beliefs-
because they are nonsignifying, autonomic processes that take place below
the threshold of conscious awareness and meaning." 20 Her analysis is based in
part on a critical response to Brian Massumi,21 which appears as the inadver-
tent return of Cartesian mind/body dualism where affect is associated with
body, and emotion with the mind.
     Practically, I approach these problems at the level of more local argumen -
 tation. What is the claim for one of these key terms, and which historical and
 argumentative warrants allow for such claims? What sorts of phenomena are
 at issue materially, and methodologically? Affect and emotion studies are dif-
 ficult when one proceeds hamstrung, with one key term valorized and the
 other condemned; the best work avoids such a prior commitment. Here's
 an example with reference to an emotion already introduced: love. Lauren
 Berlant mobilizes the traditional emotion "love," as it plays an aspirational
 role for the Dardenne character Rosetta, while love's failure in that filmic
 context can be understood only according to the dynamic that Berlant calls
 post-Fordist "affect."22 Not post-Fordist emotion. In this case "affect" better
 captures the lowness, as in "low affect," and also the negative space created by
 this particular pattern of failed aspiration which appears in the context of the
 1980s Belgian working class and its Rosetta. That said, the space itself would
 never appear as such-could not be measured-without the traditional
 emotion "love" as a crucial but vanishing reference point in that context.
     Emotion as a reference point is important, and it brings us back to the
 seminal analysis of Raymond Williams, who has had a significant impact on
affect and emotion studies, including the work of Berlant. After Massumi
and his influence, we would do well to revisit Williams if we want to work
through the ideology of emotion historically, without simply condemning
it as such. ln The Long Revolution, for example, Williams presciently details
how a "creditable emotion" comes to serve as a reference point and even as a
lived experience that directly contradicts the conditions for its own satisfac-
tion. And although this passage gets us away from the eighteenth century,
it places an appropriate coda on a long historical arc that can be defined in
terms of a new orientation toward well-being, including happiness and what
Williams calls in this passage the "feeling of freedom":

     The very strong case for general planning, not simply to avoid waste but to
     promote essential development, research and reorganization, is practically
     nullified by a wholly creditable emotion: that we reject the idea of this kind of
U N C OMPORTAll L E SITUATIONS                                                         13

   economic system controlling our lives. True, we are controlled now and will
   continue to be controlled by a quite different system, with its own denials and
   rigidities, but in the first place this is very much harder to identify, and sec-
   ondly by its very structure and ideology, it appears to offer, and in just enough
   places does offer, the feeling offreedom. 2J


According to Williams, this crucial phenomenon oflate liberal democracies-
this feeling of freedom carefully controlled-would not be well served by the
appeal to ideological superstructure alone, because it does not transpire at
the level of ideas. Likewise, "hegemony" relies too heavily upon the sense of
common sense to explain domination in the cultural domain. But neither is
this creditable emotion pre-personal or pre-ideological in the sense of Mas-
sumi's affective turn, because it must be understood, substantially, in its rela -
tionship to the ideological, which is exactly where the word "freedom" refers.
Finally, the feeling of freedom is not well served by systematic philosophy, a
la Martha Nussbaum, because the "appearance to offer" and even the "just
enough" of this creditable emotion is rhetorical. For it is precisely the struc-
ture and experience of the offer that matters in this case, not its systematic
justification or even its normativity. Or to put this another way, a "creditable
emotion" direc tly involved in political life-call it more traditionally a pas-
sion for freedom - refers to and actually embodies up to a point this corner-
stone of liberal democracy, primarily as a carefully controlled alibi keeping
at bay the welfare state in its socialist leanings. 24 Very much like Williams, the
strength of Berlant's analysis depends upon the fact that she can work histori-
cally across these two interfering dynamics-affect and emotion-without
dismissing emotion as a term somehow fallen from progressive political
grace, and therefore tainted as a scholarly reference point. By way of con-
trast, theorists after Massumi who depend on affect as pre-ideological, pre-
subjective, and pre linguistic, can wind up sounding mystical because they are
not left with much to talk about. 25
    There is another reason we get unnecessarily confused in affect and emo-
tion studies. Sometimes without realizing it, we bring to bear competing psy-
chologies of emotion whether lay or expert. For example, the "James-Lange"
theory, where physiological arousal instigates the experience of a specific
emotion (crying makes me sad) conflicts with a cognitive appraisal model
(poverty makes me sad).
    Finally-and this is important-we get confused because "emotion" can
be implicated in any one of the rhetorics listed above where there are prob-
ably others, and sometimes in more than one at the same time, depending
upon the perspective rendered. Extending an earlier example, now consider
14                                                             INTROLJ U C T I ON

God's love. "Imitation of Christ" is mimetic as we arc advised in Ephesians 5:2,
"walk in love, as Christ also hath loved us." It is prosthetic as it makes us feel
something we could not otherwise, and therefore John 4:19, "we love Him,
because He first loved us." It is not descriptive, but rather performative when
someone says "Jesus loves you," thereby instantiating the emotion unpredict -
ably because the outcome is not certain. And finally it is systematic, as it ap-
 pears, for instance, in Aquinas's systematic theology of the passions, or very
 differently in Equiano's spiritual autobiography, where we will read how the
 crucified Savior bleeding on the cross on Mount Calvary " unseals" the book
 and makes us read everything differently again, from the beginning (cha p-
 ter 2). One goal of this book is to demonstrate how the rhetorical sit uation
 determines what we mean by "emotion" in the first place, and track its usage,
 which will be variable along these lines.
     Methodologically, my rhetoric of emotion takes advantage of resources
 in that named humanities discipline. But to get a sense for the ways in which
 emotional discomfort has become a problem for us, we must widen the
 lens to include certain sorts of literary criticism and philosophy, which to-
 gether point toward the European bourgeoisie and its legacy in se ntim en-
 tal fiction - but also in our own "everyday" scenarios like the initial di nner
 party fiasco, which is nothing if not bourgeois.


                        Discomfort with the Humanities

 First my approach to literary criticism finds some good company as it asks
how discomfort appears. Writing about social mistakes, Kent Puckett has
shown how "bad form" works to produce coherence in social and textu al sys-
tems, how a mistake like Charles Bovary's opening hat mishap makes us fe el
narrative form at work when embarrassment shapes character around bour-
geois conventions violated, and shame provides the semi-anonymous voice
that would implicate a reader's investment even if that investment ultimately
takes the form of social criticism a la Flaubert: "Shame on you!"26 In turn,
what I call emotional "instability" hinges on a world that is social, but must
be understood beyond the structures of social convention if the emotion is to
appear in its proper place. Not Charles Bovary's embarrassment, but Yorick's
"horror" is a defining sentim ent we will revisit in later chapters, as it is tuned
not to social convention, but rather to the environment where social life
takes one form amongst others, including nonhuman. Bourgeois comfort is
regularly challenged by sentimental narratives as they unfold-for example,
Yorick's histrionics in Sterne's Sentimental journey, including the way that he
regularly botches "sentimental commerce" across rank, region, and gender.
UN C OMPOIITAllLE     SI TU ATIONS                                             15

At this point a role for literature, I offer, is to provide a detailed phenomenol-
ogy of being-uncomfortable that adjusts situated theories of emotion and
cognition as it has emerged in the philosophies of Dreyfus, Haugeland, Clark,
Thompson, Wheeler, Noe, and others. 27 So sentimental literature provides in
my study the substantial material for engagement with this important philo-
sophical subfield, but a distinction is also drawn on properly philosophical
grounds where l bring into focus the foundational metaphor.
     If not the much-maligned "computational" metaphor-the brain is
a computer and the mind is the program that the brain runs - what is the
metaphor system of situated cognition theories now prominent in philoso-
phy? We have already seen how, for Griffiths and Scarantino, the "cultural
scaffolding of emotional performances" exceeds individual feelings and in-
stead supports the right emotions at the right times necessary for society to
"funct ion smoothly" (italics are mine throughout this paragraph). And this
metaphor system prevails in the philosophical literature. Setting the stage
we have ethologists Jakob von Uexki.ill in the 1930s, launching his influential
theory of the Umwelt. "we begin .. . with a subject located in its environment
and research its harmonio11s relationships to the individual objects that pre-
sent themselves." 28 More recently Andy Clark invokes the dance and jazz en-
semble to illustrate how continuous reciprocal causation works across brain,
body, and local environment (24); following Hubert Dreyfus, this fine arts
dynamic is fl11id (31); the environmental coping which might otherwise feel
rough, smooth (as in smooth jazz, not Ornette Coleman or someone more
challenging, I guess; see Wheeler, 194). Then exiting this languid stage and
heading home for more domestic rest and relaxation, John Haugeland draws
back the covers on a mind " intimately embedded in its world" (quoted in
Clark, xxvi; Wheeler, 193) where, thoughtfully, Evan Thompson lays fresh
linens, and I quote: "Culture is no mere external addition or support to cog-
nition; it is woven into the very fabric of each human mind from the begin-
ning" (403). 29 How did we get so comfortable, and says who? Read so, the
literature on situated cognition appears on the edge of melancholia as it re-
cuperates a world that would be much more comfortable-Freud might call
this a canny return home-its rhetoric reassuring, as it allays our worst fears
about being-out-of-place and feeling tmheimliche as we are exiled from the
familiar. 30 Dramatized and admittedly polemic, I imagine at this point a phil-
osophical voice saying something like the following: "Thank God culture is
woven into the very fabric of each human mind from the beginning because
now I don't need to worry so much about those exaggerated problems of
alienation." Referencing the title of his 2013 book and following Max Weber,
literary critic Franco Moretti might call this a distinctly "bourgeois" form of
16                                                            INTRODU C TION

philosophy that no doubt offers the threads of its own undoing. 31 But first
let me follow the positive thread a bit further, because it helps us see some
historical continuity in the modern period I'm treating.
     Heading not toward philosophy but literature, Moretti quotes Weber
 from The Protestant Ethic as he discusses the new ascetic types of the north-
 ern European eighteenth century: "Over against the glitter and ostentation of
 feudal magnificence which, resting on an unsound economic basis, prefers
 a sordid elegance to a sober simplicity, they set the clean and solid comfort
  [Bequemlichkeit] of the middle-class home as an ideal." 32 In fact Moretti's
  third keyword comfort is embodied in the English bourgeois home and the
  historical sea change he identifies from the late seventeenth to the early eigh-
  teenth century when comfort is no longer what returns us to a normal state
  from adverse circumstances, but what "takes normality as its starting point
  and p11rsues well-being as an end in itself (Moretti, 46, emphasis author's,
  offering the transitional 1719 example Robinson Crusoe). As opposed to bour-
  geois fashion that wants to resemble the old ruling class, comfort according
  to Moretti remains "down-to-earth, prosaic" (50), which indicates why we'll
  find it serving such purpose in sentimental literature. Moretti sums up the
  paradox of comfort on the way to explaining how a keyword can function :
  "during the seventeenth and eighteenth century, two equally powerful but
  completely contradictory sets of values came simultaneously into being: the
 ascetic imperative of modern production-and the desire for enjoyment of
 the rising social group. Comfort and Genussmittel [means of pleasure like
 coffee, tobacco, chocolate, spirits] managed to forge a compromise between
 these opposite forces" (51). But where Moretti sees comfort returning cen-
 turies later as relief from work, I read comfort returning to our intellectual
scene where it provides a relief from the terrible stresses Sara Ahmed would
call queer: social disorientation and alienation first among them. 33 Likewise,
I will keep track of emotional labor as it takes shape unevenly; sentimental
literature provides the scene of (emotional) labor concealed elsewhere in-
cluding much philosophy, and hence it is a unique venue for analyzing a
new kind oflabor relations that constitute Enlightenment-era modernity. Or
to put this another way, following Kenneth Burke, sentimental literature is
where the terms if not the experience of bourgeois comfort are worked out
and secured-literature as consolation.
     In terms of philosophy, then, I want to unsettle situated cognition theory
by reading its organizing metaphor against the alternative offered in some
rather vexed literature-following Lukacs in Theory of the Novel, Moretti
writes every form is "the resolution of a fundamental dissonance of exis-
tence." But it turns out philosophy itself has something to offer in this re-
U N C O M I' 0 R TA II L E   S I T U AT I O N S                               17

 gard. The queer version of critical theory finds some common cause in the
 1930s Gestalt psychology of Kurt Lewin who wrote about the hopeless situa-
 tion, and in Wittgenstein, for whom everyday aesthetic gestures take shape
 in the context of discontent, disgust, and "discomfort" (Lectures 011 Aesthet-
 ics, 1938). The uncomfortable situation, in other words, also has some deep
 philosophical roots exposed with a queer edge, so we can return to someone
 like Dreyfus on the leap of existence and find there an opportunity for new
 kinds of critical work. 34
      Or reversing the analysis, our comfortable philosopher takes shape in a
 form that speaks urgently to eighteenth-century European history and lit-
erature where comfort itself- now the feeling of well-being-became for
 the first time a way of life. I don't want to argue about how either comfort or
discomfort is more basically human; at that level of generality both can be
plausibly argued and hence the alternatives are uninteresting like any other
general polemic around human nature. Instead the argument is historicist:
 the very distinction takes shape in a particular European eighteenth century
where the economics of well -being were initiated for our age most obviously
in utilitarianism (Austen, chapter 4), but also in key social distinctions where
lived forms of well- being were shaped against degenerative and unaccount-
able forms that do not map seamlessly onto economics broadly understood.
Hence the significance of literature where such forms of living (or not)
were figured-not just as legal or philosophical or utilitarian abstractions,
and not just as the idealized consequence of conduct books and education
whether secular or religious-but amidst the more chaotic idioms of trans-
action. Cataloging the scenes of subjection around racial slavery I'll revisit
in chapter 3, Saidiya V. Hartman contrasts a failure of post-abolition man
with pedestrian practices like stealing away, the breakdown, moving about,
pilfering, that occur below the threshold of formal equality. Similarly I am
interested in how well-being and its bourgeois comforts-whatever the met-
rics of our recent happiness indexes might tell you-unravel in the literary
artifact that can show you perfectly well the force of ideology, but also the
proliferating forms of slippage and personal failure that tell you something
crucial about how particular ways of being are formulated and where their
limits reside.


 Chapter Outlines {with a Definition of Rhetoric and a Defense of Fiction)

This book proceeds by way of a ground clearing gesture, with Darwin left
standing, four case studies each exploring a different quality of the uncom-
fortable situation-loss of composure, bearing up, environmental hostility,
-
    18                                                             INTROD UCT IO N

      feeling mixed-and an epilogue that offers, w:ith ecological neuroscientist
      Stephanie Preston, a different kind of cross-disciplinary collaboration.
          In chapter 1, I argue that Darwin's The Expression of the Emotions in Man
      and Animals can (also) serve as a foundational text for a humanities approach
      to emotion, but only if it is first disentangled from its heavy-handed edi -
      tor Paul Ekman and his basic emotions program, which has done Darwin a
      profound disservice. So liberated, I then argue, D.irwin's science of emotion
      provides a reference point for scholars in the humanities now trying to make
      their literary criticism speak to natural science. The photograph, illustration,
      and story-filled Expression (as Darwin called it) is both rhetorical and insepa -
      rable from its science that we sometimes imagine transcending its bookish
      material. In this chapter I recall how Darwin's Expression foregrounds the in-
       1erent rhetoricity of emotion, thereby outstripping Ekman's science of emo -
       ion that claims to follow in its wake, and which has recently found some
      advocates in the new subfield of Cognitive Approaches to Literature. Instead,
      I argue that Danvin's rhetoric of emotion is remarkably skeptical, which does
      not diminish its scientific piquancy, but rather aligns it with our situated
      theories in the science of cognition mobilized, among other places, by the
     philosopher of biology Alva Noe in his academic bestseller 0 11t of O ur Heads:
      Why You Are Not Your Brain, and Other Lessons from the Biology of Conscious-
     ness (2009). Thus realigned, I conclude, Darwin's Expression helps us under-
     stand anew how an adequate model of cognition must be able to account for
     literary emotion-a claim I detail in the following chapters. Schematically
    I contrast a more workable theory of situated emotion and cognition with
    1) computational models of mind, and 2) models of mind and emotion in
    evolutionary psychology.
         With the soil turned for a different story, chapter 1 also pursues the first
    of four case studies that show how a worthwhile science of emotion works
    in the study of literature, where sentimental literature offers a rich example.
    Obsessively interested in emotions as they take narrative form, sentimental
    literature around the tum of the European eighteenth century produced an
    unprecedented set of experiments that tested how "the man of feeling" along
    with a host of unstable characters might find composure-be composed - in
    a world where explanations for human activity tended instead toward new
    forms of social reason. 35
         Methodologically, chapter 2 offers a corrective to certain cognitive and
    Darwinist approaches to literature while developing a more detailed example
    of emotion, or affect criticism. "Bearing up in The Interesting Narrative of
    the Life of Olaudah Equia no, or Gustavus Vass a, the African" ( 1789 ) picks up
    a basic question: What on earth might it mean when Equiano writes he is
UNCOMFORTABLE SITUATIONS                                                       19

 "happily situated" as a slave? And how does this contradictory situation chal-
 lenge our sciences of emotion? It would seem even in circumstances that are
 relatively hospitable, practically reconciled, and religiously committed to a
scene that could sometimes appear God-given, slavery should under no de-
scription appear happy, or "comfortable" as Equiano later describes some of
 his enslaved fellows. Even the contrary 11ncomfortable is an understatement to
 the point where the very alternative marks the historic disjuncture noted by
 Moretti. Well-being is marked; it is not the universal that hedonic psychol-
ogy sometimes studies at the level of the human organism tending toward
 homeostasis. Drawing resources from Equiano's slave narrative and critical
 race theory from W. E. B. Du Bois on double consciousness to recent Afro-
 pessimism (Moten, Sexton), this chapter explores what kind of narrative re-
sources might be availabl e to a science of dramatic displacement. By way of
 negativity, Equ ia no's Interesting Narrative shows in detail how well-being is
systematically oriented (and incidentally why the "hostile work environment"
mentioned in chapter 4 is defined according to legally protected classes like
race, color, sex, fa m ily status, etc.). Where Saidiya Hartman worries about
"the very effort to represent the situation of the subaltern" (10) because she is
dependent upon what she calls the barbarous archive, I pursue in this chapter
a related methodological concern for the "situation" under extreme philo-
sophical pressure. In this racial slave situation, what counts simply as "being-
there," and under what conditions? How do things appear and at what cost?
How does Equia no feel in his own skin?
     On first impression it would seem Equiano slips conveniently into our
sciences of happiness - notably Daniel Kahneman et al.-and our theories
of situated cognition drawing directly from Merleau-Ponty, as in the pivotal
work of Alva Noe including Out Of Our Heads. Apparently Equiano adjusts
to his situation. But is this really the story? My demonstration in this chapter
proceeds through Equiano's time, his attachment/feeling, and his bearing up,
while remaining attentive to the profound inconveniences that Equiano suf-
fers despite whatever comfortable accommodations appear on the horizon.
In each of these positive instances I'll show how Equiano's testimony speaks
loudly to our sciences of happiness and situated cognition, before dissipat-
ing into queries and quibbles and counterarguments that should, in the end,
threaten any easy sense of well-being. I will thus be working a local prob-
lematic at the intersection of science and the humanities, paying special at-
tention to rhetorical qualities of a phenomenon-well-being-that escapes
our scientific interests narrowly conceived. At the same time with Equiano's
help, I'll attend to hedonic psychology and theories of situated cognition
where resilient threads from the humanities might be reinforced. Both of
20                                                                   INTRODU C TION

these science-oriented projects, it turns out, have an impulse that is explicitly
rhetorical, which means they wind up sharing significant ground with the
humanities where rhetoric usually resides.
     Now for the sake of definition, rhetorical theory has three dimensions in
this book: 1) It alerts us to forms of address wherever they may appear; 2) it
invites critical distance from those forms; and 3) it maps some of the impor-
tant ways that the world already appears to us by way of rhetorical possibili-
ties and prohibitions. In the spirit of Kenneth Burke, I explore in this book
how rhetorical theory provides a historically rich field guide to the threaten-
 ing and promising environments that are especially human, including the
 more narrowly defined "rhetorical situation" which has been considered by
 at least one key commentator fundamentally uncomfortable.36 Rhetoric, as a
 humanistic form of affordance theory, posits a situation that is not neutral
 but is rather "persuasive," threatening and promising with respect to our hu-
 man being-in-the-world. 37
     Here I am referencing Burke, the rhetorician and literary critic who, for
 instance, observes the following about eighteenth-century bourgeois poetry
 of the sublime, as it appeared from a perspective in the following century. I
will quote at some length because the passage contains many of the elements
 in Burke that inspire my work in this project, thus indicating where I see my
work fitting into rhetorical theory per se.

     The whole subject of "beauty" became obscured in much aesthetic theory of
     the nineteenth century because it tended to start from notions of decoration
     rather than from notions of the sublime. There are many possible ingredients
     behind this motivation, among them being the fact that aesthetic theorizing
     was largely done by people in comfortable situations for people in comfortable
     situations. But there is a subtler factor operating here: poetry is produced for
     purposes of comfort, as part of the consolatio philosophiae. It is undertaken as
     equipment for living, as a ritualistic way of arming us to confront perplexities
     and risks. It would protect us. Let us remind ourselves, however, that implicit
     in the idea of protection there is the idea of something to be protected against.
     Hence, to analyze the element of comfort in beauty, without false emphasis, we
     must be less monistic, more "dialectical," in that we include also, as an impor-
     tant aspect of the recipe, the element of discomfort (actual or threatened) for
     which the poetry is "medicine," therapeutic or prophy!actic. 38

As I read this passage rather selfishly, Burke is making a point about how we
must approach the rhetoric of emotion historically. We must always ask who
is attributing which emotions to whom-bracket sincerity-and what this
act of attribution is supposed to accomplish. So for example in eighteenth-
century sentimental literature including some works of what Burke calls
UNCOMFORTABLE         SITUATIONS                                              21


 the poetry of the sublime, authorial attribution of emotion to the "man of
 feeling"-like Yorick for instance-says little about his sincere emotions
 whatever that might mean, and quite a lot about the "discomfort" that would
 be addressed by this very attribution. Similarly Equiano's self-attribution of
 emotion and then our reading of it, which itself has distinct historical con-
 tours, must be considered rhetorically as a form of address and not just as
sincere expression. So in some basic ways I draw from Burke's literature as
equipment for living, and then Burke's rhetoric as a field guide to the sort of
lives that might be lived.
     Dimension one of my rhetorical theory therefore points to effectiveness,
 which is to say Equiano's happy situation appears in the narrative conse-
quentially; it does not describe first and foremost. Its design to do something
is controlled only partially by authorial intention and is discernible by the
 reader only at the risk of committing the intentional fallacy. Instead most
obviously, the passage about his happy situation asks for some kind of a re-
sponse from the reader, but a response irreducible to simple identification
 understood as suffering-with. For instance, a reader moved to abolition by
Equiano's narrative need not feel happy or miserable with Equiano, whom
we are not sure feels one way or another anyway: he qualifies, ironizes, looks
back and forth with art leading the way. Let alone the reader, or the inverted
reader: Aristotle understood full well that tragedy can be a source of pleasure,
for instance. The design itself carries rhetorical force by inhabiting conven-
tions. At the same time, the author Equiano figures the convention ironically,
which only makes sense in relation to his life story, which is to say you have
to read the story or at least know the setup for the irony to appear. In other
words, the emotion is "rhetorical" in that it requires, to appear as such, read-
ers and audiences, which is where effectiveness finds its orientation.
     Second, "rhetoric" in this case means the emotion-pathos in the clas-
sical lexicon-is not first and foremost something Equiano feels, such as
happy, nor is it something observed like a smile or a positive disposition or
an authorial attitude, but instead it transacts. Equiano does not feel happy
but instead finds himself, ironically, in a happy situation that posits an at-
titude toward the scene of subjection (-terror), the master-slave relationship
(-gratitude), and a type of social identity (- quite English). In other words,
this happy situation would be lost on anyone who isn't paying attention-
again it is rhetorical-and it cannot function primarily as an assessable state-
description. A rhetorical understanding of emotion thus offers not only a
critique of scientific theories that can't adequately take the situation into ac-
count; it also nuances the "history of emotion" a la Reddy and Rosenwein as
it focuses on social transactions.
22                                                              IN T ROD UC TION

     Finally, rhetoric as a field guide: traditionally next to deliberative rhetoric
where the goal is audience activation, we find forensic rhetoric where the goal
 is ultimately judgment, and epideictic rhetoric (ceremonial praise or blame)
 where the goal is affecting attitudes. In fact rhetorical theory traditionally
 goes into great detail about how the general vectors of threat and promise can
 be structured for maximum effect: arrange thus and so, deliver not like this
 but like that. Thus rhetoric, as a humanistic form of affordance theory- see
 Gibson below-posits a situation that is not neutral but is rather " persua-
 sive." Or to put this another way, rhetorical theory enhances awareness spe-
 cially appropriate to human environments.
     Chapter 3 continues to make the case for a literary mode - the sentimen-
 tal-while explaining what sort of things happen when the genre shifts from
 literary nonfiction -that is, the slave narrative-to the Gothic novel. "Hostile
 Environments in Ann Radcliffe's The Romance of the Forest" (1791) provides
 the next case study where this time the environments, technically understood
 with the help of perceptual psychologist J. J. Gibson, make people terribly
 uncomfortable to the point of becoming unhinged. Or even " undone," as
 rape victim Antonia protests in Matthew Lewis's The Monk ( 179 6) just before
 narrative logic finishes her off: "Is not my ruin completed? Am I not undone,
 undone for ever?" In this chapter I show how the cause of death in this in-
 stance, and more generally the terms of a life undone, find their genre in the
 sentimental version of Gothic fiction where the emotional scene is vexed. The
 sensations of princes and heroes "do not stamp the same affections on their
 domestics," observes an early practitioner Horace Walpole, and from this
 observation about the vexed emotional scene derives a principle for narrative
 construction Walpole finds first in Voltaire's melange: "Nothing is more com-
 mon than a house in which a father is scolding a daughter- absorbed in her
 emotions-weeping; the son makes fun of both of them, some relatives take
 different sides in this scene, etc." (quoted in The Castle of Otranto preface
 to the second edition, 1765). A narrative logic Walpole, Lewis, and especially
 Radcliffe pursue with notable success shows how-in contrast to tragedy,
which undoes through character-such domestic "scenes" and other human
environments can pose a real threat.
     Not surprisingly this chapter on the environment serves as a particular
kind of ecocriticism, as we now call it, while at the same time energetically
distinguishing itself from "literary Darwinism" and related versions of lit-
erary criticism where the ancient environment of evolutionary psychology
exerts undue pressure on the scene. Here instead of evolutionary psychology,
the perceptual psychology of Gibson provides the basic definition of an en-
vironment. I then adjust Gibson's definition toward a humanities perspective
U N C OMFORTAULE SITUATIONS                                                  23

where Gibson's invariance criterion hinders our understanding of a hostile
environment first in legal, and then in liLerary terms where, I argue, inter-
pretive patterns stake their own claims. Antonia's hostile environment, for
instance, is 1101 invariant with respect to human beings in general and we
should ask how so, mapping carefully the patterns and consequences that
define the hostile environment in this case. I also take time in this chapter
to show how some literary criticism that fal1s under the heading of Cogni-
tive Approaches - including work by Elaine Scarry, cognitive rhetoric a la
George Lakoff, and David Herman who practices Umwelt research-already
benefits from an environmental approach referencing Gibson.
    Thus the state of the art: it matters very much what model of cognition
one brings to bea r on the study of literature, in the laboratory, and beyond.
First and foremost m y effort can be understood as a response to students
and colleagues 1) dissatisfied with cognitive approaches to literature as they
sometimes rely upon a version of the computational model of mind, and
2) intrigued by situated cognition theory that-other than a flicker here and
there including a nice essay by David Herman-has not much been applied
to the study of literature, or to the other humanities and arts for that matter.
This despite the fact that situated cognition theory holds out relatively more
promise for work in the humanities, because it must pay very close atten-
tion to the proximate (not Paleolithic) environments where cognition ap-
pears and which means, in turn, that the precise forms of that appearance-
historical and aesthetic- are central. Folks in the humanities care very much
about the whats and wherefores of aeslhetic form. And thus I offer one sim-
ple way to describe this book: it is my effort to fill a methodological gap by
applying situated cognition and emotion theory to literature. That said, I first
found myself attracted to this project because it could be done best by way of
my home field, rhetoric-the traditional humanities field where "situations"
have been explicitly theorized the longest, and in depth.
    So chapter 3 on The Romance of tlie Forest expands our understanding of
how emotion works in the rhetorical situation. The larger point is not that
emotions in the laboratory suffer a thin description while emotions in the wild
enjoy a thick description especially when they appear in narrative literature,
which offers an emotional situation in detail. Ultimately after critique, my
methodological point is comparative. Laboratory work on emotion affords
a certain kind of emotional situation where variables must be identified and
for the most part, held constant. The experiments frame the emotions, which
appear in the subjects primed in a certain way and represented in the data
as interpreted; the situation is best set up to capture what I call in my typol-
ogy mimetic emotion. Literary nonfiction such as the slave narrative affords
24                                                             INTRODU C TION

another kind of emotional situation where variables like "happiness" might
be identified but without the same kind of constancy requirements; most
importantly they stake a claim or make a point or appeal to the reader, which
is to say they are manifestly rhetorical. They appear only incidentally in the
subject, and most evidently in a textual apparatus understood historically-
the effort to hold constant does not apply in the same way, and interpretive
variance over audiences and over time need not be a disadvantage.
     Likewise literary fiction-for example, a Gothic novel in the sentimental
 mode-offers a rhetoric of emotion although the frame affords something
importantly different, namely attention to the frame as such (remember for
instance Sterne's "commentary on the text"). In its manifest detachment
from actual situations, literary fiction allows us to better focus on emotional
form by drawing attention to its rhetoric without deferring to practical exi-
gency-in a way the novel serves as an emotional laboratory of a different
sort where possibilities can be explored without giving way to probabilities.
The hostile environment that appears in Radcliffe's The Romance of the Forest
 depends upon many things but not some kind of practical threat that would
 in fact diminish the formal project and thus the emotion in its more pre-
 cise determination. Fictional status allows for emotion studies not available
 otherwise. Adeline is the fictional heroine threatened virtually by the stuff of
 imagination, like a hollow sigh that seems to pass near her at one point- but
 the light of day dispels her irrational fear. Subsequently she is actually threat-
 ened by the Marquis, who is also, of course, the stuff of imagination on many
 levels, including on the level of"fiction" that provides the novel its basic con-
ceit. The Marquis is a fiction. But is he? In a formula: real terror, the novel
 teaches us in this instance, is fictional. Terror, unlike a dangerous situation,
 is the stuff of uncertainties as it takes provisional shape and is characterized
 with respect to our fragile sense of well-being. Hence also the centrality of
 rhetoric per se, as human being is done up in certain ways-terror is irreduc-
ibly a fonn of address.
     Or to put this in terms of philosophy of language: the threat to Adeline is
not real, nor is Antonia's rape, which is to say these people never existed-
they are nonreferring terms in the world of fiction. But does that mean the
abstracted sentence "Antonia was raped" or even "X was raped" is unaffect-
ing? Not necessarily. Like the dinner party scenario, in this case what matters
is not the reference alone-though of course that reference can make quite a
difference practically speaking and hence the considerations of literary non-
fiction or simple reporting by police for instance-but rather the rhetoric
of possibility that embeds a sentence like this in the world beyond any im-
mediate practicalities. The very fact that "X was raped" serves as a grammati-
UN C OMFORTARLE      SITUATIONS                                              25

cally correct, semantically meaningful, and practically possible sentence (of
a horrific sort) makes it affecting. What the world does with a sentence like
 this ranges quite broadly, however, and likewise what an author of sentimen-
 tal fiction does with this sentence form or its neighbors like Antonia "being
 undone" can range widely as well. This is why the sentence form in Lewis or
nearly in Radcliffe can be read meaningfully down to the level of the specific
text or even the scene: Adeline was not raped after all but her very real fears
are exquisitely mapped by Radcliffe against very real threats. Adeline's status
as a fictional character thus has the added advantage over nonfiction in that
she brings to bear, rigorously, the affectability of nonreferring terms.39
     Now to summarize the case for fiction across three examples. Barsalou's
laboratory anger, Equiano's nonfictional happiness, Adeline's imagined ter-
ror: Emotion Studies give us unique access to the very question of fictional-
ity that cuts across all three. Or to put this another way, anyone interested
in Emotion Stud ies-including a scientist-can learn something essential
from literary fiction, for it is the very best domain for studying the emotional
situation essential to the experience, along with the concrete forms that bring
it to bear. There is good reason why subjects in the Barsalou laboratory famil-
iarize themselves with mini-narratives that sound like they fell out of Craft
of Fiction 101.
     Finally these form s will vary, which is why research in Emotion Studies
must transpire in a variety of literatures subsidiary to a generic category like
the novel, or a modal category like the sentimental; for example, emotional
form in Austen's Sense and Sensibility is "mixed" along lines that certainly
speak to the traditional literary mode referenced in the title, while forming
situations that can be exemplary for Emotion Studies writ large, including,
as we will see, a scientific perspective. At the same time, this claim about va-
rieties of emotional situations doesn't posit radical incommensurability (see
epilogue). Since the phenomenon at hand, such as happiness, or terror, is
manifestly shared across academic disciplines and domains of everyday expe-
rience, we are obligated to work carefully across some traditional boundaries.
Meanwhile recent scientific work on irrationalism find a subtle advocate-
perhaps even a sophisticated interlocutor-in the form of literature.
     Mixed feelings, the topic of Chapter 4, are famously at the heart of Jane
Austen's novel Sense and Sensibility (1811) and we think we know what that
means, like a recipe: combine two parts a feeling like gratitude, one part hap-
piness, a dash of resentment and you get something like Elinor. But mixed
feelings in the novel and beyond are poorly served by this disequilibrium
model recalling the long tradition back to Galen; in fact mixed feelings are
a matter of negotiated circumstances where feelings may be at odds as they
26                                                            INTRO D U C T ION

converge on character.~0 Hence the significance of literature and particu-
larly the sentimental novel as a cross-disciplinary research domain, where
this kind of rhetorical situation takes shape along lines that can be anchored
beyond the novel per se. Referencing the science of situated emotion and
 hedonic psychology (Kahneman on bias and persuasion), this chapter offers
a new way to understand mixed feelings as rhetorically situated. T he novel
opens with the Dashwood women hopelessly displaced from their Sussex
 home because in this case and in many others like it, a woman's well-being
 depends upon the diminishing returns of a man's benevolence: thus Mary
 Wollstonecraft's "equivocal beings" where sisters and then sisters-in-law are
 structurally at odds around the sentiments of a man. Says Fanny to Mr. Dash-
 wood: "Do but consider, my dear Mr. Dashwood, how excessively com fort-
 able your mother-in-law and her daughters may live on the interest of seven
 thousand pounds." By what means might 1, the reader, establish what's going
 on around this "excessive comfort" that posits a norm framed by oxymo-
  ronic humor? Though fiction, this is once again a question of very real-world
  rhetoric, as I'll take time to explain further by way of Kah neman and M iller's
 1986 work on "Norm Theory: Comparing Reality to Its Alternatives."~ 1 This
  work in psychological science shows how emotions appear in the rhetorical
  effort to establish norms, like the comfortable living owed Mr. Dashwood's
  women. What counts as comfortable in this case? Says who? Not o nly will
  the norm depend upon how different positions are brought to bear, in this
  case by the characters Fanny, Mr. Dashwood, and then also the Dashwood
 women, who are absent from the scene diegetically but very present by way
 of the narrative position that casts doubt upon Fanny's goodwill. The humor
 in this case depends upon a distribution of sympathies that casts the feeling
 of the moment-care or charity-outside the frame of the characters who
 express it, while pointing with someone like Wollstonecraft to a real-world
 situation that belies the immediate sentiment. As Kahneman and Miller dem-
 onstrate in ways that are surprisingly relevant to our literary example, "real-
 ity" is established with respect to its alternatives. In particular Kahneman
 and Miller study how sympathy is a function of the perceived abnormality
 of a victim's fate (What do these women actually deserve? What does anyone
deserve?), the availability of counterfactuals (the good life appears just out of
 reach: not too close and not too distant), and the actions of a focal ind ividual
 that seem mutable in comparison to background actors (Austen's art depends
in part upon the expectation that Elinor bear some responsibility-focal char-
acters map the activity domain disproportionately). Then on top of this base-
line sympathy that is established in a network of nonreasonable expectations,
Kahneman and Miller posit a correlation between the perceived abnormality
UN C OMFORTADLI!      SITUATIONS                                                 27

 of an event and "the intensity of the affective reaction to it, whether the affec-
 tive reaction be one of regret, horror, or outrage" (146). Or in our case, the
 regret, horror, or outrage a reader might find in Sense and Sensibility depends
 upon norms like resource management that carry historical weight, as they
 are perceived sometimes shockingly through the events as narrated.
     Thus chapter 4 also explores a methodological opportunity at the inter-
 face of science and the humanities, beyond some recent work in Cognitive
 Approaches that proceeds unecologically as it pursues-frequently with
Austen - "theory of mind," or what is colloquially called mind reading,
 where the extra-mental falls away as mere projection or anthropomorphism.
 No doubt mind reading is one of the Austen dynamics, as critic Lisa Zunshine
 has readily shown. But in order to understand what's going on emotionally,
 the operative world, including something like resource distribution, must
 factor in, much like Kahneman would remind us, not as mental projection
but rather as the real- world anchors that are established rhetorically as norms
are negotiated with horrific and sometimes humorous effects.
     Finally the epilogue, " Irreconcilable Differences?" explores what collab-
orative work across emotion science and the humanities might look like, as
I compose with University of Michigan ecological neuroscientist Stephanie
Preston.42 By first outlining various limitations and constraints of laboratory
science, we highlight some recent hardening of the "two cultures" divide in
emotion research. Then we discuss experiments that show how laboratory
research on emotions can be modified by the critical and rhetorical methods
that distinguish the humanities. Classic laboratory studies of fear, for exam-
ple, document the persistence of unconscious white vs. black bias while, at
the same time, neglecting circumstances like the history of racial slavery that
could provide causal explanations of just the sort that these same scientists
first raise, then anxiously defer. More promising from a humanities perspec-
tive are experiments that draw on a critically informed, situated emotions ap-
proach, which explicitly incorporates language and audience considerations
into experimental design, and into interpretation.
     The hope is that more work on emotion is possible at the intersection of
science and the humanities. But first we need some methodological adjust-
ments. The study before you shows what those adjustments might look like.
                                         1


     Defending the Humanities with Charles Darwin's
    The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals




When Charles Darwin first published The Expression of the Emotions in M nn
and Animals (1872) his purpose was to show continuity in emotional exprcs-
 ·ion across species and thereby strengthen his theory of evolution. Surround -
    g the book's illustrations, therefore, one finds descriptions of an imal emo-
   .)n designed to elicit our recognition as members of a universal audience.
  n this case (Fig. 1.1) our charm instantiates Darwin's argument for emotional
continuity across species at the same time that we as members of an histori-
cal audience may miss the sly provocation of contemporaries with which the
passage concludes.

   The lips of young orangs and chimpanzees are protruded, sometimes to a
   wonderful degree, under various circumstances. They act thus, not only when
   slightly angered, sulky, or disappointed, but when alarmed at anyth ing - in
   one instance, at the sight of a turtle- and likewise when pleased.... T he ac-
   companying drawing represents a chimpanzee made sulky b y an orange hav-
   ing been offered him, and then taken away. A similar protrusion or pouting
   of the lips. though to a much slighter degree, may be seen in sulky children. 1

This passage, like many others in the Expression (as Darwin called it) is both
rhetorical and inseparable from its science that we sometimes imagine tran-
scending the material that binds it to accidents of medium, occasion, and
person. In this chapter, I recall how Darwin's Expression foregrounds the in-
herent rhetoricity of emotion, thereby outstripping Paul Ekman's science of
emotion that claims to follow in its wake, and which has recently infiltrated
the humanities like a Trojan horse settling in a new critical subfield of Cogni-
tive Approaches to Literature (CAL). Instead I will argue Darwin's rhetoric of
emotion is remarkably skeptical and humanistic, which does not diminish its
I) I! I' I! N I) I N G   T H E   H U M A N I T I ES   W IT H   OA RW I N ' S   EX p R ES S I ON   29




Fl Gu RE 1 . 1. "Chimpanzee d isappointed and sulky. Drawn from life by Mr. Wood." From Cha rles

Darwin, Tl,e Expression ofrhe Emotions in Man and Animals (London: J. Murray, 1872), 139_ (Wellcome
Library, London , CC BY 4.0)


scientific piquancy, but rather aligns it with our "situated" theories in the sci-
ence of cognition recently mobilized, among other places, by the philosopher
of biology Alva Noe in Out of Our Heads: Why You Are Not Your Brain, and
Other Lessons from the Biology of Consciousness. 2
    Though initially a bestseller, the Expression lapsed into relative obscurity
during the next century as Darwin's evolutionary theory established itself pri-
marily on other terms, including, most importantly, the fossil record, homol-
ogies across related life-forms, geographic distribution of related species, and
artificial selection like dog breeding. Meanwhile, the ambiguities of studying
emotion rendered it a difficult and even suspect science for the next century,
especially insofar as the mechanics of our emotional life lacked the reliable
metric promised by a rational life that might be reconstructed in the spirit
of logical positivism or tracked, for instance, through idealized behaviors
such as rational choice in the marketplace. 3 "It's raining" seemed the kind of
thought that might reliably link the mind and the real world, but something
JO                                                                    C HAPTER ONE


like the experience of fear suffered from all sorts of semantic and practical
ambiguities that made any experimental project difficult to realize, even af-
ter Darwin's evolutionary argument. More recently, however, the Expression
has made a dramatic comeback as the study of emotion mushrooms across
academic disciplines and in applied fields such as homeland security•1 or in
 a popular arena such as the cop drama Lie to Me, which was built around
 expert analysis of emotional microexpressions a la Ekman.5 Now considered
 wrong about certain facts, such as the Lamarckian inheritance of acquired
 characteristics and the emotional primitivism of the insane, 6 Darwin's Ex-
 pression has recently reemerged as the foundational work in the scien ce of
 emotion, both in terms of methodology and theory. 7 In 1998, nearly a full
 century after the second edition, Ekman introduced and provided a runnin g
 commentary on the third edition, underscoring how passages such as the fol -
 lowing grounded the methodology for studying emotion still follo wed today
 across the social and natural sciences.
     Dr. Duchenne galvanized, as we have already seen [Fig. 1. 2, 1.4 ], certain
     muscles in the face of an old man, whose skin was little sensitive, and thus
     produced various expressions which were photographed on a large scale. It
     fortunately occurred to me to show several of the best plates [Fig. 1.3, bottom],
     without a word of explanation, to above twenty educated persons of va rious
     ages and both sexes, asking them, in each case, by what emotion or feeling
     the old man was supposed to be agitated; and I recorded their answers in the
     words which they used. Several of the expressions were instantly recognized
     by almost every one, though described in not exactly the same terms; and
     these may, I think, be relied on as truthful, and will hereafter be specified.
     (E, p. 21)8

     Then Ekman abruptly inserts the following comment in the 1998 edition:
 "Darwin describes here his use of a method to find out what information
 is conveyed by an expression: asking people to judge the emotion shown
 in a photograph without any information about the situation in which the
expression occurred, and determining whether or not they agree. This has
become the most commonly used method for studying facial expression, al-
though Darwin is rarely cited as the first to use it."9 Indeed, Ekman himself
has applied what he considers essentially the same methodology over the last
thirty-five years as he developed his influential work on the basic pancultural
emotions displayed in the image set (Fig. 1.5). Can you name them?
     Relying on this image set and others like it, Ekman has produced a meth-
odology for studying emotion scientifically, and from this work he has de-
veloped the Facial Action Coding System (FACS) used widely in cognitive
science designed to locate emotional centers in the brain by correlating brain
DEFENDING TMP.               H UM/\NITIES           WITH       DARWIN'S           EXf'llESSION               31




FI c u RE 1 . 2. "Horror and Agony. Copied from a photograph by Dr. Duchenne." From Charles Darwin,
Tlic Exprcssio11 of tire E111otio11s i11 Ma11 a11d Animals (London: J. Murray, 187?), 307. Duchenne's original
dra matization gives us " une expression d'effroi mele de douleur extreme ... a!'expression de celle terrible
t motion de l'ame s'ajoute cdle de la douleur horrible de son supplice. Celle expression doit etre celle du
da mnf' (G uillaumc- Renjamin -Amand Duchenne de Boulogne, Mccm1is111e de lo. pilysio110111ie /1111110.ine,
011 a11alyse elecrro-pilysiologiq11e de ses diffcrents modes de l'cxprcssio11 !Paris, 1862], p. 108). R. Andrew
Cuthbertso n translates this passage as " an expression of terror mixed with extreme pain . . . the harmful
pain of torture has been added to the expression of this ter rible emotion. This expression must be that
of the damned" (Duchenne, Tlie Mecila11ism of Human Facial Expression: Studies in Emo1io11 and Social
Interaction, trans. R. Andrew Cu thbertson !Cambridge: Cam bridge University Press, 1990], 92). (Well-
come Libra ry, London, CC BY 4.0)



activity with exposure to carefully selected photographs. 10 Of the cognitive
scientists who rely upon FACS, Antonio Damasio is the most influential in
the humanities, as we will see below.
    In Nature, for example, Damasio describes an experiment where patients
with a damaged amygdala judge faces on a trustworthiness and approach-
ability scale. 11 The faces had been previously selected by "normal individuals"
who were asked: "How would you rate this face on the scale of one to five,
relative to the trustworthiness and approachability that the owner of the face
32                                                                               C HAPTI!R ONE




                                                 I




                                                 2

FIGURE 1.3. "The original photograph was shown to twenty-four persons, and they were separatel y
asked, without any explanation being given, what expression was intended: twenty instantly answered,
'intense fright' or 'horror'; three $aid pain, and one extreme discomfort." From Charles Darwin, Tire
Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals (London: /. Murray, 1872), 299. The top image, which also
appeared in the first edition of Expression, is ofthe famous Lond on photographer Oscar Gustav Rejlander
representing the emotion of"astonishment." (Wellcomc Library, London, CC BY 4.0)



inspires? Or, in other words, how eager would you be to approach the person
with this particular face if you needed help?" As it turns out, Damasio re-
ports that amygdala-damaged patients judged as trustworthy and approach-
able faces "you or I" would consider suspicious and try to avoid. 12 Then on
the basis of this experiment, Damasio and his colleagues located the relevant
emotion in the brain, while bracketing some pressing questions about what
counts as a trustworthy and approachable face, to whom, under what cir-
cumstances, and why. Technical issues abound.
DEF EN DIN G          THE    HUMANITIES WITH              DARWIN'S          EXP/IESSION              33

    In a section of his book provocatively titled "The New Phrenology?," Noe
outlines a debilitating set of problems faced by researchers who try to locate
us in our brains, including most importantly the following: 1) the impos-
sibility of eliminating feedback produced by the two-directionality of the
brain-senses loop; 2) normalizing imperatives that produce results against
a stock brain; and 3) the impossibility of eliciting direct information about




F tG u RE 1. ~ .   The uncropped Duchenne photograph. (Welkome Library, London, CC BY 4.0)




F IGURE 1. 5. The facial expressions ofEkman's initial, basic emotions, from left to right, anger, fear,

disgust, surprise, joy, sadness, and Ekman himself as contempt. (Reproduced with permission from Paul
Ekman Group, LLC)
34                                                             C HAPTER ONE

consciousness or cognition through PET and fMRI technologies that have to
correlate physical magnitudes to blood flow, blood flow to neural activity,
and finally neural activity to mental activity like feeling suspicious (see Noe,
19-24; also my epilogue). Although a brain-scan image may contain impor-
tant information about neural activity related to a cognitive process, cautions
 Noe, "we need to take care not to be misled by the visual, pictorial character
of these images. Brain scans are not pictures of cognitive processes in the
 brain in action" {Noe, 24). 13
      But for our purposes the shortcoming that matters most is methodo -
 logical: emotions cannot be broken down into basic units - whether that
 means molecules, 14 brain images, or facial expressions-without losing track
 of the phenomenon at hand. Psychologist Jerome Kagan emphasizes our cat-
 egory mistake when the amygdala is activated by exposure to a photograph of
 an angry face and the resulting image is called an emotion. The neuroscientist
 who insists that a particular brain state represents an emotion resembles the
  'Jhysicist who denies the reality of my pen because the mathematical intcrpre-
   ation of quantum mechanics rejects the existence of stable objects. 15 T hough
 it may be useful to look for the elementary foundations of both psychologi-
 cal and physical phenomena, Kagan concludes, complex phenomena possess
 distinct properties and therefore require "distinct metrics and principles"
  ( What Is Emotion? 214). That Kagan's valedictorian address to his students
 and colleagues requires this reminder is not surprising. 16 Surprising is that
 cautionary tales about parsimony in human affairs speak to a growing num -
 ber of humanities scholars who overlook precisely the situational nuances
 that would seem most amenable to their indigenous methodologies, as we
 will see below.
      So what does an evolutionary psychologist like Ekman mean by basic
 emotions? Ekman applies the word basic to emotions evolved for their adap-
 tive value in dealing with fundamental life tasks such as achievements, losses,
 frustrations, and so on. According to Ekman, each emotion "prompts us in a
 direction which, in the course of evolution, has done better than other solu-
 tions in recurring circumstances that are relevant to goals," and "innate fac-
 tors play a role in accounting for the characteristics they share, not species-
constant or species-variable learning." 17 Thus his commentary on Darwin's
 Expression winds down with the following strong program: "Although the
specific event varies-the type of food, the general theme-ingesting some-
thing repulsive as a cause for disgust, or ingesting something attractive as
a cause of enjoyment-is universal. · I think this is a good model for all the
emotions."18 However, this is also where Ekman and his legions leave Darwin
behind, with a sleight of hand that obfuscates the subtlety of Darwin's work at
DE F EN D I N G   T H E   1-1 U M A N I T I ES   W IT H   DA R W I N ' S   EX P R ES S I O N   35

 the same time that it nudges to the periphery of serious science the emotions
 that escape this expressivist model of evolutionary biophysiology. In fact, as
 we will see below, Ekman doesn't consider anything beyond the basic emo-
 tions to be emotions at all.
     Among other things, this impoverished Darwinian model suggests we in-
 vestigate how a novel might serve as an emotionally competent object where
 certain formal features elicit from the reader a sympathetic or antipathetic
 response divorced from immediate action. 19
     An early example of such criticism would be June Howard's American
 Literary History article "What is Sentimentality?," which mobilizes Ekman
 and Damasio in an effort to undermine debates about whether sentimentality
 is a good or bad thing. More important than this evaluation, argues How-
ard, is a transdisciplinary investigation of sentimentality that would better
explain how reading sentimental fiction is a bodily act where the text that
 produces "pulse beats and sobs ... radically contracts the distance between
 narrated events and the moment of their reading, as the feelings in the story
are made tangibly present in the flesh of the reader." 20 Likewise in Shake-
 speare's Brain: Reading with Cognitive Theory, Mary Thomas Crane draws
from Ekman and Damasio to argue for a reading of literature that grounds
the mind - including conscious and unconscious mental experiences of per-
ception, thought, and language- in the brain and other bodily systems. 21 In
Jane F. Thrailkill's Affecting Fictions: Mind, Body, and Emotion in American
Literary Realism, Ekman and Damasio are mobilized throughout, particu-
larly where the novel is described as an aesthetic technology of the human
organism. 22 "In the relatively recent field known as Cognitive Approaches
to Literary Studies," summarizes Suzanne Keen in her study of empathy and
the novel, the work of Ekman, Damasio, and Joseph LeDoux have "virtually
canonical status" insofar as matters of affect are generally considered under
the umbrella term "cognitive." 23 And that's where the impoverished Darwin-
ian model promoted by Ekman and Damasio obscures more than it reveals
(I critique "literary Darwinism" in chapter 4). A robust account of the social
world is essential for our understanding of emotion, and therefore we are
led astray by any parsimonious account of the social world where cognition
is reduced to a bodily function. Instead, with Darwin I want to foreground a
more appropriate rhetorical model of cognition where consciousness is situ-
ated in the brain-body-world nexus.
     That's not to say cognitive approaches are impossible-indeed I offer
my own alternative in this book which has certain affinities with the recent
work of Terence Cave 24 and Jonathan Kramnick,25 as well as Elaine Scarry and
David Herman as I noted in the introduction. The issue is which cognitive
                                                                                                       C HAPTER ONE

approach, and which model of cognition. The critical works just mentioned
and othe!rs like it might pr01,ide sensitive readings despite the impoverished
model of consciousness at the core, but the returns are diminishing. In her
lexical analysis of Shakespeare's plays ( for instance, home and home in The
Com~dy of Errors), Mary Thomas C rane mobilizes the cognitive rhetorics of
George Lakoff and Mark Turner while offering "a possible background" for
 Patricia Parker's cultural criticism of Shakespearea n figures (SB, 33) . 26 But
precisely at the point where Crane situates such fami li ar linguistic analyses
against a cognitive science background the argument fails. Though a critic
 like Gail Kern Pa.ster might productively scrutinize bodily experience in rela-
 tion to discourse, she ha.s, according to Crane, paid relatively little attention
 to the brain. " the material place ...,;thin the body where discourse is processed
 and thererore where discursive construction, if it occurs, must be located"
 \ SB, 7). But everyt...f-iing humans do can be located in the brain at some poin t,
 so me obse...--vation does not help us read Shakespeare anv more than it helps
 us drive to t:he grocery store, w-b.ich we al.so do thanks, in part, to o ur brain.
 Crane c..'{f'i.ains rar too much wrth the brain: it is the ~material site where di.s-
 t.:nurse =.ta-s die body. •...1:ere enrry imo the s;nnbolic occurs, and therefore
 whea 6e ,m.biecr is coi::.:;rruCc:=ei- ( SB, ;-) . It is ~is a material basis for a limited
 ;cnse of ·essc::-ri.tl· i::.u:rr-~ acrri!:n.rrc:s as well a space for individual arrange-
 me::m of c:e:irnns" , SB,, z3 l. Sc wher;. rr come:; time to ill.5L7..LSS T imothy Bright
 aru: 5h:ik~~e:c:!:cu ±e. p~Ju::::;e; bd:w::d. erno!ion.:tl ccrpreSsio n, for iruu.nce,
 ~-::x;a-: ~:ca ~.:;;- ; ,:.,[, i::: ±e b--~o;.md. t Sa: SB., ~ n19 ,, foreclosing cul-
 ::.:r.u. ==~               i:r:. d:e:,1,-~:::. of PZ1C:!z-, cT,--=?~ as a suppl.::mcn::.. And what <.fo es
 '.itI!...'":lt:l:'!: cc ±,, cs: The c;:,:-:, - . a..:.:o::-,--:;:'i! to C r.:.i!e, "'con.-,-cit-..;.1:es the m.;i::~..a!

 iirc. :~...e-= .:i.ct1::,p- -!r...:p;:f~ =::___..c 00, p:-00::.-.:c the r:-i ==r,~ ~'2 i~ r.,i~ tresu-
 ::t:c.. :::c :--.s--.., ~ - - 3:- ~-:-~-is ;♦,.:,.;e:-i _ ~"!m.<l LS- ilicreO~• s.._~~t!~~;!r~ Ul ~
 ::n:.:::. =.Ir.~-.. ... ,.., ~ _c: ---- - uJ- r.£:.e ~Q=~:: ·~-:le:-~ ;1. ..-r;-:~ m~,: be bC':.J .g~:
 .:.e:c.:! =:a! ~ - : r ·= --c_~ 00 -~ ~-=-= ;!=.(: t3 ci::i~-=c....

         :. :.1lS ..:,:..-~_r,-a:rL ~ : - .. =,.- ~ =~ - - ~=t:: ~~ ,; ~ ..-~ ;i;i~:u..rc..:i=-.!s- c;;.,.. 2 ::-.i.-
 ~ .,,.,;...;; - ~=TT"~ c:.c!' (~!Y<.P--....:~::.e,==:e._ _2.,::~ ~i_:~....:.-~ :---:-;~. .~:.S0f ~,._:_'-~

 ~ ~ c. :-~_.i_..::..~•c-- ~ .-::-.-=-:-~c,c;~,-n.~- ~~-~-=-~ 7~                        ...--.i::: ;---;_,.-::~:5,-i-~~~t..:'.t:r




 .... .
~=c.~             .             - . -                 - ... -                         -         :,     .         -
                 :!.,L i. ~ ~-•k""lp.._--i;. ~- J:S:~~ .a..-:-~:.t,-e ..:"t.'\n.1~..L-n'-~n ~t';.' '? lTIS, Uii !rl...~ID '4..""'l.ll

:!.!,i:•.:a-J:i:= ~ i:.=-....:'-=:f ::5... :x~.-a.r:.d rr.0,d. nrn1ly t,"'I ...1ur:-:cl-.·cs z.r,J l(') t.'"le Wl'•r15
:=: -.,.-1- -we _-re. r: _.i...:,.: no, ;.:.i..7:i~.ngly for Thr.ailki11 this .afrc-..-:riv::--.:-'-"'f;nitive
D E F E N D I NG T H E   H U M A N I T I ES W I T H   DA R W I N ' S   £ X PR ES S I O N      37

achievement of literature relies explicitly on biological stability according to
Darwin's Expression as filtered through Ekman: "Drawing in evolutionary
theory, these emerging accounts suggest that while the cultural significance
of feelings, along with rules about displaying them, may fluctuate over time,
the actual corporeal architecture of emotional experience-almost universal
to members of a species- has evolved so slowly over the course of millennia
as to be, in a limited time frame of human history, practically stable." 28 This,
in turn, means the literary critic like Thrailkill can acknowledge cultural criti-
cism as importan t but seco ndary, and then trump it with biological criticism
with ostensibly wider reach. But Darwin himself is an equivocal ally in this
project.
      In this case Darwin's gen ius lies partially in his comparative study of emo-
tion across culture and species that avoids the dramatic reductions Ekman
and other scientists o f emotion rely upon to make their work acceptable
\\i thin protocol defined too narrowly- reductions that later justify scientis-
tic concl usions d rawn too broadly. Though these humanistic commitments
to scientific responsibility typ ically recognize some contributions of critical
theory, they tip the balance by taking seriously advances in evolutionary psy-
chology and cognitive science of the particular sort I have briefly outlined.
But in reducing the domain o f cultural e~--planation they achieve, whether
intentionally or not, a dubious political end of the sort critiqued by Lauren
Berlant in the introd uctio n to her collection of essays Compassion: The Cid -
tilrt? and Politics of an Emotion. \\'hen emotion is reduced to a basic unit,
such as the face, we should always ask abou t the institutional cons.:-quenco;
in Berlam's case she tracks the trade-off when compassionate con~r.-atisrn
reloc21es a particular zone of intimacy.

   Compassionate conservatism advo-:ates a s.ense of dignity to be derived fn.,m
   labor itsdf- o f a p2rri..:ular son:. ~ o longer casting a li, ing \,-age, publi.: c:du-
   carion, affordable housing, and uni\-e rsal access to e.:onomi.: rew:m:es as the
   foundatio n of the indi,id ual and colle'\.-riYe good lifo in the l"nited Sme-s.. the
   current s-.zre ideal<>g:· sanctifies the personal labor of reproducing lire a: " '---rk.
   at home, and in communities. That is, income-producing labvr i,; de-emc:d
   valuable chiedy in the come,_, of its pan in making smaller-s-.--ale. fa.:.:--to-fa.:e
   publics.~-;

In other words, face-to-face and other sorts of emotional encounters that
we might anribute to our biologically grounded intuitions must alw-ays be
considered in a larger political context where the status of social institutil."lns
is at stake. And this cautionary tale supported by Darnin's fa-pr~ssi,1n, I ~-
lieve, applies equally to scholars in the humanities who might very well reje.::t
38                                                                  C HAPTER     ONE


the politics of compassionate conservatism. No matter what the desired out-
come, a model that squeezes culture between the pincers of a brain-world
divide hampers our facility in cultural work and criticism.
     In contrast, Darwin's rhetoric is essential to his nonreductive scientific
 project because emotions are themselves fundamentally rhetorical, which is
 to say Darwin's methodology accounts for the emotion's medium, occasion,
 and social situation. Consider again the word-image relationship, which was
 of crucial importance in Danvin's study of emotion and remains so to this
 day. Early in the Expression, Dan~n describes his methodology while intro-
 ducing an important caveat now typically sidelined: persuasive examples
 notwithstanding (for example, our Ekman exercise above), Darwin does not
 assume word-image identity as he recognizes how interpretation shapes each
 point in the equation.
     Upon vie,~ng the now famous Duchenne photographs, "several of the
 expressions were instantly recognized by almost everyone," notes Darwin,
 while others were subject to the most widely different judgments and pro-
  nouncements. But rather than explaining away this divergence like Ekman by
  way of an emotional hierarchy, "display rules" (E, 383), or stipulative defini-
  tion, Da™n cautiously introduces the role of imagination:

     This exhibition was of use in another way, by convincing me how easily we
     may be misg11ided by 011r imagination; for when I first looked through Dr. Du-
     chenne's photographs, reading at the same time the text, and thus learning
     what was intended, I was struck with admiration at the truthfulness of all,
     with only a few exceptions. Nevertheless, if I had examined them witho ut any
     explanation, no doubt I should have been as much perplexed, in some cases,
     as other persons have been. (E, 21; emphasis added)

Here Darwin draws positive attention to the interpretive relationship be-
tween word and image, rather than justifying a reduction. Among other
things this means drawing attention to the medium itself, which in this case
is a set of photographs. Or more precisely, it is a report and discussion of
an experiment designed around a set of photographs. And what about that
photograph of horror as it appears in the book? It does not display horror as
the woodcut might since, in this case, horror is obviously extorted by way of
galvanism, and thus the photograph draws attention to its own staging. But
don't all of these images, including those in the described experiments, stage
emotion rather than instantiating some unmediated, face-to-face emotional
event of the sort considered paradigmatic by Ekman? At the same time that
Darwin exploits the reader's immediate reaction to an orangutan woodcut
or galvanized horror, he foregrounds by way of narrative the emotion's me-
l)Ef'ENOING THE       HUMANJTIJ!S        WITH     DARWIN'S       EXPRESSION             39

diation and thereby brackets the claim to some pure, face-to-face emotional
experience.
    This digression into imagination also allows Darwin to discuss emotions
Ekman leaves off of his basic list, including love, sympathy, hatred, suspicion,
envy, jealousy, avarice, revenge, deceit, devotion, slyness, guilt, vanity, con-
ceit, ambition, pride, humility, and so on. Indeed the antiquation we may
find in Darwin's list, where deceit and devotion are considered emotions,
would suggest that human and not just evolutionary history is essential to
Darwin's science. Witness Darwin on devotion:

   A hu mble kneeling posture, with the hands upturned and palms joined ap-
   pears to us, from long habit, a gestu re so appropriate to devotion, that it might
   be thought to be innate; but I have not met with any evidence to this effect
   with the various extra-Eu ropean races of mankind. During the classical period
   of Roman history it does not appear, as I hear from an excellent classic[ist],
   that the hands were thus joined during prayer. Mr. Hensleigh Wedgwood has
   apparently given the true expla nation, though this implies that the attitude is
   one of slavish subjection. " When the suppliant kneels and holds up his hands
   with the palms joined , he represents a captive who proves the completeness of
   his submission by offering up his hands to be bound by the victor. It is the pic-
   torial representation of the Latin dare man us, to signify submission." Hence it
   is not probable that either the uplifting of the eyes or the joining of the open
   hands, under the influence of devotional feelings, are innate or truly expres-
   sive actions; and this could hardly have been expected, for it is very doubtful
   whether feelings, rnch as we should 110w rank as devotional, affected the hearts
   of men, whilst they remai ned during past ages in an uncivilized condition.
   (E, 217-218; emphasis added)

Civilization entails, a pparently, a distinct emotional regime that separates it
from the uncivilized, thereby contradicting an evolutionary theory that sees
our continuity with Pleistocene hunter-gatherers but doesn't see the distor-
tions inevitably imposed by our interpretive lens. According to Darwin we
need historical narratives (however dubious in this instance) first to denatu-
ralize what might appear an innate feeling such as devotion, and second to
explain in positive terms a feeling that we might experience and observe as
universal. This is Darwin's skeptical work. Darwin's historical work is part
and parcel of his ca reful scientific observation; without it the "we" of his first
audience would naturalize some particular posture and thereby see the emo-
tional phenomenon poorly. Meanwhile the "we" of his universal audience
fails to recognize a particular posture at all, which is itself crucial data revealed
by way of comparative anthropology and human history. In his microstudy
of devotion and other emotions, Darwin takes into account the emotion's
40                                                             C HAPTER ONE


linguistic and visual mediation, its occasion in the service of a pointed argu-
ment, and personal perspectives of varying historical immediacy. That is to
say, again, that Darwin's scientific theory of emotion is inherently rhetorical,
which is a methodological strength instead of a weakness. Of course, Ekman
would ignore a phenomenon like devotion altogether.
     And what about love? We can return to Darwin in our effort to expose
 the sleight of hand where Ekman offers the feeling of disgust as the model
 for all emotions while elsewhere he defines "all emotions" so narrowly that
 the list excludes love and hate amongst others. "No emotion is stronger than
 maternal love," qualifies Darwin in a Victorian mood, "but a mother may
 feel deepest love for her helpless infant, and yet not show it any outward
 sign" (E, 82). Indeed, Darwin doubts whether a long list of what he calls com-
 plex states of mind are revealed by any fixed expression and are sufficiently
 distinct to be described or delineated in strictly scientific terms. But unlike
 Ekman, Darwin turns to the literary humanities for a demonstration of how
 any science of emotion must ultimately make room for interpretation. When
 "Shakespeare speaks of envy as 'lean-faced in her loathsome ease'; or black, or
 pale, and jealousy as 'the green-eyed monster'; and when Spenser describes
 suspicion as 'foul ill-favoured, and grim,' they must have felt this difficulty.
 Nevertheless, the above feelings-at least many of them - can be detected
 by the eye; for instance, conceit; but we are often guided in a much greater
 degree than we suppose by our previous knowledge of the persons or circum-
 stances" (E, 260).
     Ekman recognizes this complication but circumvents the implications
 by relabeling everything beyond his seven basic emotions "affective com-
 mitments." "Emotions are brief and episodic, lasting seconds or minutes"
 explains Ekman. "Parental love, romantic love, hatred, envy or jealousy last
 for much longer periods-months, years, a lifetime for love and hatred, and
 at least hours or days for envy and jealousy. In each of these there is a strong
 commitment, an important attachment (negatively in the case of hatred,
 envy and jealousy). They also differ from emotions in specifying something
 about the cast of characters involved" ("Commentaries," 83).
     Of course, in noting how the cast of characters is essential to the composi-
tion of supposed nonemotions including love, hatred, envy, and jealousy, Ek-
man seems to invoke Aristotle's famous discussion of the emotions in book
two of the Rhetoric just before he breaks off abruptly. Darwin, by contrast,
writes long and fascinating Aristotelian passages where the cast of characters
that compose an emotion are specified in their complex sociopolitical rela-
tions. Take, for instance, Darwin on hatred:
DE Jl ENDING     THE   H U MAN IT I I! S   W [TH    DAR W IN'S     EXPRESSION              41

    If we have suffered or expect to suffer some wilful injury from a man, or if he
    is in any way offensive to us, we dislike him; and dislike easily rises into hatred.
    Such feelings, if experienced in a moderate degree, are not clearly expressed by
    any movement of the body or features, excepting perhaps by a certain grav-
    ity of behaviour, or by some ill-temper. Few individuals, however, can long
    reflect about a hated person, without feeling and exhibiting signs of indigna-
    tion or rage. But if the offending person be quite insignificant, we experience
    merely disdain or contempt. If, on the other hand, he is all-powerful, then
    hatred passes into terror, as when a slave thinks about a cruel master, or a sav-
    age about a bloodthirsty malignant deity. ( E, 234)

 So in this case and others like it the very experience of an emotion, according
 to Darwin, depends upon the social and not the biological situation, namely
 the relative significance of the characters involved- including the subjec-
 tive perception of such - which can be systematically distorted, of course,
 by hegemonic constructs including racism and patriarchy. 30 By way of gram-
 matically loaded m icronarratives Darwin, like Aristotle, takes into account
 the uneven social relationships that instantiate an occasion for hatred (having
suffered), the phenomenological time of hatred (expecting to suffer), and the
 intentionality of hatred (as a function of willful injury not accident). There
 is no way a facial expression or isolated brain scan can adequately represent
 an emotion like hatred, and simply defining it like Ekman as nonemotional
begs the question.
     Finally, when Darwin wishes to discuss these so-called inactive emotions
he again finds recourse in the visual arts and literature, and not just as a re-
pository for accidental wisdom in the manner of Damasio, who also likes to
quote Shakespeare, but rather as a necessary component of a larger theory.
Consider the famous first-century sculpture (Fig. 1.6) where Laocoon has
been variously considered "bellowing" like a bull ( mugitus) by Virgil,31 "no-
ble" ( edle) by the philologist Winckelmann, 32 "groaning" by Lessing,33 and
silently struggling by Charles Bell, whose book The Anatomy and Philosophy
of Expression as Cormected with the Fine Arts served as Danvin's polemical
foil. 34 In Bell's Anatomy, Darwin found a sketch (Fig. 1.7) that he relies on to
invoke Lessing's famous argument that the visual arts must disperse violent
emotions. Visual arts provide an insufficient venue for the scientific study of
emotion, warns Darwin, because, just as Lessing suggested, contracted facial
muscles destroy beauty.
     Insufficient, yes, but still necessary in a rich research program where one
is obligated to analyze emotion beyond measurable facial expressions. As in
literary narrative, where an emotion such as hatred can emerge only through
                                                                                    (.. 111\PllR ON£




Fl G u RE 1. 6 .   " Laocoon and Sons." ( Photograph by Livio Andronico, CC BY-SA 4 . 0 )




a cast of characters, in the visual arts "the story of the composition is gener-
ally told with wonderful force and truth by skillfully given accessories" both
human and nonhuman, animate and inanimate, foregrounded and back-
grounded (E, 22).35 In this case, the skillfully given accessory of the sea se r-
pent is crucial for any justifiable interpretation of the emotion represented,
for we are not talking about orgasmic ecstasy, after all. 36 O ther key accessories
that tel1 this emotional tale "truthfulJy" include Laocoon's two sons perishing
beside him, who thereby force the scene beyond the emotions of noble self-
sacrifice that otherwise might look resolute. And ultimately these immediate
characters and accessories offered up to the eye emerge only against the re-
ceding background of mythical characters that include the vengeful Apollo,
who is punishing his disobedient priest, and the Trojan people for whom
Laocoon sacrificed himself by warning them of gift-bearing Greeks.
    So where is the emotion (Fig. 1.8)? Is it simply in that first face as the Ek-
man experiment insists? I offer the joystick in case you are thrown by the
anthropomorphism of a smile on the middle image, but in fact I think the
 0 E PE NDIN G         T II E   1-l U M AN IT I E S   WIT 11    DA It WIN ' S      EXPRESS f ON                 43

  McDonald's Happy Meal provides an efficient countermodel to Ekman's
 pseudo-Darwinian program. After all, the Happy Meal is much more than a
 burger, fries, drink , and plastic toy, more than simply an emotionally com-
 petent object (like Ekman's delicacy) triggering happy faces like the one next
 to it. Rather, the Happy Meal is an emotional artifact seemingly untethered
 to - Karl Marx would say alienated from - the complex social transactions
 that produce it. So instead of turning toward Ekman as the supposed cham-
 pion in our day, I herctically prefer to imagine Darwin turning toward his
 contemporary Marx as he says in this case an accessory that tells the emo-
 tional tale has apparently taken on a life of its own. I think revisiting Darwin's




FIG u RE 1 . 7.   Sir Charles Dell , Tl,c t\11nto111J' mid Pliilosoplry. (Wdlcome Library, London, CC DY 4.u)
                                                                                  C HAPTER ONE




F 1cu RE  1.8. [Left] Photograph I in a sequence of smile intensities (PF1-6) from the Pictures of Facial
Affect (POFA) Collection. (Reproduced with permission from Paul Ekman Group, LLC.) [Center] Gen-
eral Happ)' Meal Box. [Right! "Joystick black red petri." (Digital image by Ansgar Hellwig, PhD)




 work on emotion suggests this turn to sociorhetorical analysis is at least as
 plausible as the other.
     In his foreword to Andy Clark's Supersizing the Mind: Embodiment, Ac-
 tion, arzd Cognitive Extension, David Chalmers suggests we might also re-
 search extended desires, extended reasoning, extended perception, extended
 imagination, and "extended emotions." 37 "One might have something akin
 to an extended mood, if not an extended emotion, when one's environment
 is always nudging one toward happiness or sadness," offers Chalmers by way
 of example,38 and certain Extended M ind (EM ) theorists such as the philoso-
 pher of biology Alva Noe have begun to work in this direction. "In the Begin-
 ning Was the Situation," offers Noe, not some Cartesian computing machine
 that builds up internal pictures of the scene, makes plans, and executes them
 ( Out of Our Heads, 101). Moreover, according to Noe, these "situations" are
profoundly characterized by emotion. If, for instance, a psychologist is trying
to understand why an infant will become distressed when his or her mother
becomes still or impassive, that psychologist would go astray in positing
the infant as a separate individual observing the mother. Instead we should
consider the mother as "literally one of the structures constituting a child's
psychological landscape": the baby's relation to the other unfolds in "an
emotional setting" ( Out of Our Heads, 31). Likewise, Hubert Dreyfus-an
influential EM theorist in the tradition of philosophical phenomenology-
argues that any artificial intelligence project designed to approach human-
ness must account for emotional settings, and to do so it "would also need .. .
a model of our particular way of being embedded and embodied such that what
we experience is significant for us in the particular way that it is. That is, we
would have to include in our program a model of a body very much like
DEF EN D I N G   T H E   H U M A N I T I ES   W IT H   D A RW I N ' S   £ X l' R ES S I ON   45

ours with our needs, desires, pleasures, pains, ways of moving, cultural back-
ground, etc." 39 But for all this interest in emotional and cognitive settings and
situations, EM theorists like Dreyfus, Chalmers, Clark, Wheeler, Thompson,
and Noe come up short when describing this worldly side of the brain-body-
world nexus. To put it bluntly, they too need the arts and literature in the
spirit of Darwin. Since sentimental literature is central to the Cognitive Ap-
proaches movement, I conclude this chapter with an example from Sterne's
A Se11time11tal Journey through France and Italy , which is a masterful study of
emotional situations of a certain sort.
    As Yorick travels through the treacherous mountains between Turin and
Savoy, he reports how a journey that is potentially horrible fares better with
unhurried sen tim ents giving way to this observation of peasants encountered
en route:

   Poor, patient, quiet, ho nest people! fear not: your poverty, the treasury of your
   simple virtues, will not be envied you by the world, nor will your valleys be
   invaded by it.- Nature! in the midst of thy disorders, thou art still friendly to
   the scantiness thou h ast created - with all thy great works about thee, little
   hast thou left to give, either to the scythe or to the sickle-but to that little
   thou grantest sa fety and p rotection; and sweet are the dwellings which stand
   so shelter'd .< 0 (120 )

Nowhere in this scene do we find suggestive documentation of face-to-face
encounters a la Paul Ekman. In fact the pathos of this scene thrives on a vari-
ety of distancing m echanisms familiar to the landscape artist and the critical
theorist, respectively.
    At the very least Yorick's pity for the peasants must be understood in
contrast to the geographical horror it supersedes, thereby escaping a Steven
Pinker type of literary Darwinism where the novel is " cheesecake for the
mind," and novelistic fear provides an opportunity for virtual experience of
a situation better avoided in real life. 41 Immediately following upon a "feast
of love" at the table of a large and respectful French peasant family (119),
this scene of partial spectatorship restages the classically tragic sequence that
moves from horror to pity as a critical opportunity (as we will see in a min-
ute), not as a virtual experience.42 Yorick's pitiful perspective can be under-
stood only against a romanticized landscape that includes-along with sweet
dwellings-poor, patient, quiet, honest people who would no doubt have a
very different perspective on the situation, if asked. And l imagine most of
this situational complexity, including its class element, is not lost on the in-
genious author, who earlier outlines the terms of a "sentimental commerce"
where instead of natural immediacy, sentiment is produced by the imbalance
                                                                C HAPTER ONE


of social exchange (9). Narrating the start of his sentimental journey, Yorick
e~--plains that being-out-of-place produces an imbalance of sentimental com-
merce where conversation, for instance, comes at a high price: think humili-
ation over a botched commercial transaction or awkwardness when attempt-
ing a joke in a foreign tongue.
      Certainly knowing "whose sentiment it is" constitutes a crucial aspect of
 our understanding of the psychological dynamics of this particular scene and
 the novel as a whole, as literary critic Lisa Zunshine might insistY But if, like
 Zunshine and many of her cognitivist colleagues, we assume that our own
 reading mind and the "mind behind the sentiment" function like a Cartesian
 computing machine managing information and generating metareprcsenta-
 tions, then we desensitize ourselves to the relevant cultural institutions of
 language and perception, and a scene like this can be reduced to "imagined
 landscapes with their pathetic fallacies, personifications, and anthropomor-
  phizing" (27, 47, 63). And contra the critic of sentimental literature June
  Howard (quoting Sanchez-Eppler), these words on the page do not produce
  in the reader "pulse beats and sobs" that radically contract the distance be-
  tween narrated events and the moment of their reading ( though some of
  Sterne's racier moments admittedly do, for this reader at least). Quite the
  opposite-by way of negation, Sterne stages the empathic moment with bis
  typical irony that suggests we take no emotion at face value.
      Fear not, envied not. What do negated emotions feel like after all? Look
  like? What bit of information about the real world do they represent? Where
  might they be located on the face, or mapped in the brain? It turns out that
  the most emotionally pregnant words in the passage-fea r and envy--appear
 only in negation, which blocks the royal road to experience we might very
 well expect on a sentimental journey. The straightforward command "Poor,
 patient, quiet, honest people! rejoice . . ." would have been the more immedi-
 ate stylistic solution Sterne avoids in favor of his negation that invokes a par-
 ticular "world" at the same time that it forces readers to account for multiple
 perspectives, including our own, as we map the emotional terrain. That's one
 function of negation as we will see in Austen as well: the rhetorical situation
 including the reader is, in this case, implied.
      Why the negative at all, let alone the double negative, when a logician
 like Bertrand Russell insisted the world can be described without the use of
 the word "not"? Clearly in Yorick's case the impotent command "fear not"
differs from both the command "rejoice" and the condition of fearlessness,
which would exploit the situation differently by way of an evaluative judg-
ment (no one calls himself fearless, after all). 44 " Poor people," "scythe" or
"sickle," "sweet dwellings," "valleys," "an unenvious world." Emotion maps
DE F E N D I NG   T H E   H U M A N I T I ES W I T H   DA R W I N ' S   E X PR ES S I O N   47

  these relationships-character, tool, dwelling, landscape, world-always
 considering the dynamic frame itself as a factor in the equation that renders
 the world 11nenvious, implying that we should not take the world for granted
 as an unarticulated background, or as a natural environment, or as a com-
 fortable setting-in-general, or as a comfortable situation. In short negation is
 not just a logical operator. Negation has a rhetorical function.
     To explain how this is so, I offer a brief excursus on Laurence Horn's neo-
 Gricean masterpiece A Natural History ofNegation as it distinguishes amongst
 negation's numerous functions - including logical-which is not reflected
 by a comparable symmetry in language structure and language use (xiii). 45
 Horn's indispensable contribution comes when he pays close attention to
 this asymmetry across instances that would typically escape philosophers and
 linguists like hi m , while offering analytic continuity with literary examples
 taken on their ow n terms, as I will show using this example from Sterne, and
Austen.
     What should we do without double negatives in Jane Austen's Emma, for
 instance, where Harriet can stand in " no unhappy reverie" completely dif-
 ferent from the lo gically equivalent " happy reverie" that would lose the im-
 plication of surrounding characters, narrator, author, and reader? Here's the
passage at issue: " Harriet, who had been standing in no unhappy reverie, was
yet very glad to be called from it, by the now encouraging manner of such a
judge, and such a friend as Miss Woodhouse, and only wanted invitation, to
give the history of her hopes with great, though trembling delight." 46 Though
this example from Emma isn't his, Horn would no doubt draw our attention
to the traditionally suspect rhetorical figure litotes, which is a form of under-
statement where an affirmative is expressed by the negative of the contrary
(303). What is the function of litotes? Typically Horn sets the stage with some
natural history as he calls it. Just as hyperbole (according to Aristotle's Rheto-
ric) is a figure fit for young men of quality, and ellipsis the favored figure for
politicians, Alexander Pope under a pseudonym sees in litotes "the peculiar
Talent ... of Ladies, Whisperers, and Backbiters" (quoted in Horn, 304). In-
stead of logically dissolving litotes or condemning it as inherently seditious,
however, Horn asks us to consider the crucial implications when stereotypic
situations are pragmatically avo ided. Horn suggests "the corresponding peri-
phrastic forms, stylistically less natural, longer, and more complex, are re-
stricted, via Q-based implicature to those situations outside the stereotype"
(304 ). That is to say Horn invokes the Maxim of Manner according to Grice:
be perspicuous, avoid obscurity and ambiguity, and strive for brevity and
order. So when violated with something like litotes, the Maxim of Manner
suggests you are getting at something else altogether. And I would concur
                                                                  C H,.PTER ONE

that Austen's double negatives function just this way, as they render critical
situations that refer to, but exceed a stereotype: in this case a happy reverie
that would leave out the "judge" and "friend" Emma Woodhouse as well as
 the narrator who suggests indirectly the two descriptions are mutually exclu-
 sive. Since when, after all, is a judge your friend or vice versa? Not recently,
 I would imagine, but to get this point and to understand how it precipitates
 no unhappy reverie on the part of Harriet, "cultural background etc." needs
 to be rendered in detail that exceeds the capacity of philosophical pragmatics
 narrowly conceived.
      The emotional phenomenon does depend upon background - but we
 must distinguish what this means contra pragmatic philosophers. We are
  not talking about the unarticulated "background of intentionality" a la John
 Searle, or differently Hubert Dreyfus, which set the stage inadequately if we
  use Horn's model to look at examples from literature.47 Dreyfus is right that
  the satisfactory gestalt that causes an action is in no way represented when it
  comes to an expert tennis swing or a master chess move, for example (29, 32).
  Likewise literature does not represent a satisfactory gestalt that causes an ac-
  tion even when it can avail itself of copious description, or a narrator who
  seems to tell us exactly what causes an action like Harriet standing- namely
  a reverie. But the quality of nonrepresentation across these examples differs
  significantly. In the examples from Dreyfus, nonrepresentation is an after-
  thought when we comport ourselves normally. In the example from Austen
  as interpretable through Horn, nonrepresentation is the result of flouting
  a conversational norm, which is something we do all the time. And Horn
  might agree that literature-not everyday activity- is especially suited for
  this kind of abnormality because it takes definitive shape in unnatural styles,
  unnecessary length, and undue complexity.
      Or to put this in positive terms, literature is in a special position to teach
  us about normality and its construction. Literature and especially certain
  kinds of novels provide the richest information for reading rhetorical situ-
 ations dynamically, with framers such as the reader implicated sometimes
 beyond what might be imagined by an author who is not a feminist in the case
 of Austen, and not a Marxist in the case of Sterne.
      Returning to our main line of inquiry, we now want to know where in
 Sterne's material "cognition" is located and how it works. Some might say
 cognition is embodied and embedded in the world, composed in particular
 (but not infinitely variable) ways. But against the grain, Yorick's "world" does
 not envy the poor, it disregards the simple virtues, it avoids the valley as does
 Yorick himself-again the work of negation. So this passage carefully char-
acterizes Yorick's "cognitive world" as Wheeler might put it, which Yorick
DEP EN D I NG   T I! E   H U M A N IT IES   W IT H   D A RW I N ' S   E X P II E S S I O N   49

 shares partially with certain others like the attractive lady he next encounters
 (121), but less so with the poor of any sort. Remember, however, that Yorick
 explicitly disavows such characterization - a world of brutal gentrification
 after all - instead throwing in his lot with friendly "nature," before passing
 by the scene untouched, relieved of the geographical terror he faced on high.
 Hypocrisy yes, but that's not the end of it. Cognition in this scene is never
 comfortably embedded in the scenery (as some theorists might imagine) nor
 is it detached (as other theorists might imagine): it is practically situated but
 uncomfortably so, which points us to another order of the emotional phe-
 nomenon where the author and reader appear on the scene. Another way to
put this: the terrible discomfort of the character Yorick is pseudo-resolved
diegetically, in telling the story from a first-person perspective, which in
turn produces second-order discomfort in a reader who alone can register
the irony o f this scene that beautifully " models" a social world where class
makes all the difference down to the most minute details of perception, ac-
tion, emotion, and cognition; remember how the story might be told differ-
ently from the peasant's perspective. Such is the critical moment essential
for reading sentimental literature, including less ironic works like Fielding's
David Simple or Henry McKenzie's T he Man of Feeling, which nonetheless
have a critical edge insofar as they each implicate a world turned upside down
by men who feel. 48
      Working against the Ekman trajectory in cognitive science, I argue that
an emotional phenomenon, including love or a so-called basic emotional
phenomenon like terror, does not announce itself unequivocally. As Griffiths
and Scarantino argue, indeterminacy must be in-built for the phenomenon
to emerge as emotional in the first place, and sentimental literature provides
sophisticated models for how this indeterminacy takes shape in forms we call
historical.
      The mind is never comfortably embedded in the scenery (pace EM the-
ory) nor is it detached (pace certain forms of CAL): it is practically situated
but uncomfortably so, which points us to another order of the emotional
phenomenon where the audience appears on the scene. This is the critical
moment, essential for reading literature as we will see in subsequent chap-
ters, and for reading faces, as Darwin insisted. Emotional phenomena do not
announce themselves unequivocally. Indeterminacy (but not radical indeter-
minacy) must be in-built for the phenomenon to emerge as emotional in the
first place.
     What might this story look like from the perspective of evolutionary bi-
ology? Would it not be advantageous if we all wore our emotions on our
sleeves, so to speak, plastered to our foreheads so anyone could read them
so                                                                C H A PT E R   ONE


without equivocation like the Ekman fantasy, or they were available by way of
Vulcan mind meld, which would eradicate the need for emotions at all, as the
creators of Star Trek so cleverly realized? Isn't emotional indeterminacy mal-
 adaptive, as evolutionary biologists might say, a species trait that should have
 been selected against over the long term in favor of more direct and ostensi-
 bly more practical communication? Though here l cannot make the case in
 detail, I can point out how Stanford biologist Joan Roughgarden and others
 working on biodiversity provide an alternative perspective more amenable
 to our skeptical Darwin and the revised consilience he can offer. Instead of
 selecting sexually for ideal types, argues Roughgarden, a species needs " a bal-
 anced portfolio" of genes to survive over the long term, 49 and sex, which en-
 tails a very wide (but not indefinite)50 range of behaviors- reproduc tive and
 othenvise-is the social activity that continually rebalances a species' overall
 genetic portfolio in the context of dynamic environments. Instead of offering
 only background noise, indeterminacy of the sign (as we might call it from
  he semiotic perspective, where X is somewhere between attractive or repel-
  ~nt, pro- or antisocial, praise or blameworthy, and so on), is compatible with
 .:,iodiversity insofar as it constitutes the social. Antisocial eugenics or cloning
 are Roughgarden's counterexamples; just like the computer scie ntist knows
 that focusing only on the code while ignoring the execution environment is a
 mistake, cloning biologists who focus on the nucleus of the cell while ignor-
 ing the cytoplasm make the same mistake insofar as they have ceased to work
 ecologically.5'
      Consider, finally, one of Darwin's favorite subjects in the Ex pressio n, the
 infant displaying "mental distress" (Fig. 1.9). 52 He might be hungry, sleepy,
 gassy. Perhaps there are a few more possibilities but not an infinite number,
 or at least that's what we like to think. But wouldn't it be more practical, more
 adaptive, if the label, "hungry!" appeared on the forehead of an emotional in-
 fant or if we could reliably read the infant's mind? Why aren't we permanently
 sequestered in utero so that all of these communication problems might be
 avoided in the first place? In the spirit ofRoughgarden we might observe the
semiotic indeterminacy of emotional expression is a corollate of biodiversity
 precisely because it necessitates communication; the work of triangulating is
 never done nor should it be.
     We need the arts and literature to study emotion because they transpire
on the appropriate phenomenological level where experiences happen, on
the one hand, and where experience is characterized, on the other. Just as we
cannot understand bird flight by studying only feathers, to cite Noe's exam-
ple, we cannot understand emotional experience by studying only the face,
the eyeball, the ear, the brain (see Out of Our Heads, 157). To understand
DEFENDI NG T H E            H U MA N IT I I! S      W l TH       DARWIN ' S   E. X P II E. S SI ON   51

                                                 ....




             /                                 .,                                        s




       2
                                                             (

FIGURE 1. 9 .    " Weeping Children from Darwin's £r:pressio11 of Emotio11s." (WeUcome Library, London,
CC BY 4.0)



experience beyond having it we need human beings in the world character-
ized, which is to say we need people in situations. And not just people in situ-
ations isolated for the purpose of answering isolated questions in the mode
of social scientific inquiry, though this approach also has its utility. Our peo-
ple in situations should be subject to the maximum degree of manipulation
and critical scrutiny, reflection from inside and outside, and subjected to all
sorts of imaginative possibilities so that even the complexities of e:Kperience
that shimmer just beyond our immediate grasp still can make their presence
felt by way of tropes, like irony, that help define the humanities. As Darwin
understood over a century ago we need the arts and humanities for many
reasons, including for the sake of good science that can account for both the
basic ways we are, and the ways we can be.
                                                  2


   Bearing Up in The Interesting Narrative of the Life of
    Olaudah Equiano, or Gustavus Vassa, the African

    It was now between three and four years since I first came to England, a great part of
    which I had spent at sea; so that I became inured to that service, and began to consider
    myself as happily situated; for my master treated me always extremely well; and my at-
    tachment and gratitude to him were very great. From the vario us scenes I had beheld
    on ship-board, I soon grew a stranger to terror of every kind, and was, in that respect
    at least, almost an Englishman.
                               E Q u I AN o , lntere,ti11g Narrative'


    Let us therefore say ... that the life of consciousness-cognitive life, the life of desire or
    perceptual life-is so tended by an "intentional arcn which projects roundabout as our
    past, our future, our human setting, our physical, ideological and moral situation, or
    rather which results in our being situated in all of these respects. It is this intentio nal arc
    which brings about the unity of the senses, of intelligence, of sensibility and m otility.
    And it is this which "goes limp" in illness.
                    M ER LE Au - Po NT Y , Plre11ome11ology of Perception'




 Having read this far, you can guess I'll make use of Merleau-Pon ty's going
 limp, his illness that speaks to a world turned upside down. But first we get
 Merleau-Ponty's rigor and his sense of stability, which is also where we begin
 reading Equiano's Interesting Narrative--that is, somewhere in the middle
 when things are bearing up. What would it mean to be "happily situated" as
 a slave? What things appear within reach at this point in Equiano's narrative?
 On first impression it would seem Equiano provides an answer that slips con-
 veniently into our sciences of happiness-notably Daniel Kahneman et al.-
and our theories of situated cognition drawing directly from Merleau-Ponty,
as in the notable work of Alva Noe, including Out of Our Heads: Why You Are
 Not Your Brain, and Other Lessons from the Biology of Consciousness (2009).
In short, Equiano adjusts to his situation. But are we sure this is the story?
My demonstration in this chapter proceeds through Equiano's (1) time,
(2) attachment/feeling, and (3) bearing up, while remaining attentive to the
profound inconveniences that Equiano suffers despite whatever comfortable
accommodations appear on the horizon. Slavery as inconvenient-a rather
absurd understatement-actually points to the analytic problem of this
chapter. In each of these three positive instances-time, attachment, bear-
Bl!ARING U P    IN   l!QUIANo ' s   INTERESTING     N,\RIIATIVE                 53

ing up-I'll show how Equiano's testimony speaks loudly to our sciences of
happiness and situated cognition, before dissipating into queries and quib-
bles and counterarguments that should, in the end, threaten any easy sense
of well-being. Discomfort remains profound. I will thus be working a local
problematic at the intersection of science and the humanities, paying special
attention to rhetorical qualities of a phenomenon-well-being- that escape
our scientific interests, narrowly conceived. At the same time, with Equiano's
help, I'll attend to hedonic (happiness) psychology and theories of situated
cognition where resilient threads from the humanities might be reinforced.
Both of these science-oriented projects, it turns out, have an impulse that is
explicitly rhetorical, which means they wind up sharing significant ground
with the literary humanities.


                            Time Doesn't Add Up

The first object that "salutes" young Equiano's eyes when he arrives on the
Afri can coast aft er capture- a slave ship - resets his calendar to year zero. It
marks a terrible reb irth, or renaturing where nothing is yet known or prop-
erly incorporated; at the same time, it provides an initial reference point for
experiences that will now accrue in some new and more normal fashion. Fol-
lowing upon zero, the ship fills Equiano with "astonishment, which was soon
converted into terror" (55) because it was something he had never experi-
enced (56 ). Equiano is at that point more persuaded than ever that he was "in
another world, and that every thing about ... was magic" (59), recounting,
in excruciating detail, how in this magical new world even familiarities like
fish begin to fly, clouds appear as land through the mariner's quadrant, and
the familiarities of basic sense decompose. The terrible closeness of place, the
heat of the climate, the copious perspiration, the loathsome smells, the groans
of the dying, the galling of the chains, the altogether "wretchedness of the
situation" on a slave ship undoes completely, just as it was designed. "Insup-
portable" names for Equiano the living conditions that collapse around him,
while "inconceivable" names the conditions for knowing that collapse at the
same time (58). "Every object was new to me," recounts Equiano,3 referring
both grammatically to houses and horses he sees upon landing in Barbados,
and also narratively, to a merchant's yard where the live cargo, including
himself, were all "pent up together like so many sheep in the fold, without
regard to sex or age." Here, in this new world, "every new object" includes
familiars like mothers and children who now appear totally different, like so
many sheep (60).
    So many sheep. Equiano's year zero foreshadows, at the same time, just
54                                                              C HAPTER TWO


what you might imagine, a series of seconds where the calendar would be
reset once again: second nature, second coming. Equiano's tortured rebirth
into a world turned upside down, and even his appearance as one of so many
sheep, suggests that the signs of this new world point in all their perversity
toward the next world, which seems to always shimmer in the background
even when it isn't immediately recognized as such. "I was from early years a
 predestinarian," recalls Equiano. "I thought whatever fate had determined
 must ever come to pass" (119); which leaves the reader to wonder how early,
exactly? Evidently before even his exposure to Christianity proper. Within
 the first handful of pages, Equiano recalls lgbo native beliefs: "there is one
Creator of all things .. . who governs events, especially our deaths or captiv-
 ity" {40). And it is no accident this (same?) Creator "who in very deed leads
 the blind in a way they know not" soon after appears to his comfort, even
 before Equiano's conversion to Christianity appears in the narrative proper
  63). Remember, "comfort" in the eighteenth century describes first what
   ;od can give you. Comfort is only secondarily what the world can give you,
   nd it tends to arrive "overrated" as creature comfort. (In 1769, as the OED
 documents, B. Wallin \\/Tites in the Etemal Mansion, 31: "a just estimate of this
 life is becoming and useful; but we are prone to over-rate creature-comforts,
 and place too much upon them.") Equiano's interesting narrative certainly
 does mark a conventional chronology as we learn about his life early- to-late,
 including his by-the-book rebirth into Methodism, which Merleau-Ponty
 might identify as the "intentional arc" of religious experience. And which,
 we will see, recapitulates the rebirth he suffers into slavery when Equiano is
 resurrected from social death4 : his senses are predictably renewed- touch,
 taste, smell, vision-Merleau-Ponty's "unity of the senses" finally achieved.
 No doubt his rebirth does provide some spiritual comfort in the face of crea-
 turely comforts withheld, at least for the time being.
     However at the same time, each moment, each experience, fractures
chronological time into arcs that point elsewhere and unpredictably, without
ever achieving a godlike comprehension that would settle everything. Such
perspective only God has, after all, so a mere mortal like Equiano can only
read the signs, which are diverse and don't necessarily add up. Senses of the
old creature fail to guide practically: the blind know not where they are led
(Isaiah 42:16). And sacred rhetoric likewise reverses the temporal order of call
and response, the sensual order of the voice before the ear: "Before they call,
I will answer; and while they are speaking, I will hear" (Isaiah 65:24, quoted
in Interesting Narrative, 182). Unity of the senses would thus find its organ
outside of any particular creature as such, organized into patterns that predate
and antedate creaturely life. After capture, what Equiano "sees" and "tastes"
BEARING     U P   IN   EQUIANO'S   INTF.RESTING      N,\RliATIVE                 55

 in an African town called Tinmah (52) clocks as a natural resource-sugar-
 that might in the future be profitably exploited (i.e., cultivated in Africa by
 free native labor, Vincent Carretta notes, 52n95). So Equiano sees the com-
 ing world of free commerce, which would no longer rely upon slave labor.
 At the same time, with the help of John Gill amongst others, Equiano sees
 in the manners and customs of his countrymen not just Africans, but Jews
 "in the pastoral state," before they reached the Land of Promise (43), but after
 the world has fallen according to Genesis. To summarize, following Equiano
 we find at least a) ontogenic time, which sees the world ofEquiano's narrative
 begin at the beginning, "I was born ... "; b) historical time, which sees the
 commercial world sometime after 1794 when the ninth edition of the Inter-
 esting Narrative was published still in Equiano's lifetime; c) prophetic time,
which sees the world coming to an end; and d) the time of predestination, or
 perhaps, more accurately, "prevenient grace," which precedes human deci-
sion, ordering my (perceptual) world thus not so, as it cuts through the other
 three temporalities ontogenic, historical, and prophetic.
     "Almost an Engl ishman" has pointed interpreters of Equiano's split sense
to W. E. B. Du Bois on " double consciousness" of a black person in a pre-
dominantly white society. Among others Vincent Carretta and Henry Louis
Gates Jr. give us this influential and not inaccurate line of interpretation. 5 But
at the same time I hope my interpretation ofEquiano's sense does not split in
two, if that means each perspective can be measured against the other thanks
to some common denominator. In The Souls of Black Folks (1903) we read: "It
is a peculiar sensation, this double-consciousness, this sense of always look-
ing at one's self through the eyes of others, of measuring one's soul by the tape
of a world that looks on in amused contempt and pity" (3). No doubt Du Bois
provides here one important challenge to Kant's unity of experience enjoyed
by consciousness that cannot split in principle because it is removed from
something particular like a black body. 6 Following Du Bois, the doubling of
consciousness decenters experience so that its rightful ownership is called
into question along Hegelian lines.7 If one "looks through the eyes of others,"
then what one perceives, or experiences, will not be one's own in some abso-
lute sense. We are obliged to a critical investigation of rightful ownership in
principle and in practice, where in each case the question is: By what power
does sense experience take shape? Some responses follow.
    Writing in 1952 about "The Lived Experience of the Black Man," Frantz
Fanon starts with a brutal observation from the perspective of white soci-
ety: '"dirty nigger! ' Or simply 'Look! A Negro!"' (89). In a section on "The
Black Man and Hegel," Fanon concludes for the black Frenchman, "the situ-
ation is unbearable" (196), and I will return to this formula in the last sec-
S6                                                            C HAPTER TWO


tion of this chapter on bearing up. 8 In 1990 Iris Marion Young addressed this
question-By what power does sense experience take shape?- from a femi-
nist perspective, with the help of Merleau-Ponty and Simone de Beauvoir:
"women in sexist society are physically handicapped" (42). They tend not to
put their whole bodies into engagement in a physical task with the same ease
and naturalness as men; the space available is constricted (33). On this model
"sense data" is not neutral as it takes shape in the context of patriarchy; the
 data available to a monitor placed on the skin is, in this case, determined by
 the social environment as is physical capacity-hence the title of Young's
 famous 1980 essay, "Throwing like a Girl."9 Likewise in A smming a Body:
 Transgender and Rhetorics of Materiality, Gayle Salamon has recently asked,
"What are the consequences for embodiment and subjectivity when the rela-
 tion between self and skin is not one of ease and euphoria but discomfort
 and dysphoria" circuiting through the gaze of an external world "hostile to
 gender ambiguity"? (27).'0 After Hegel and Du Bois, much has been made of
 the power that divides consciousness, as it seems to locate sense in the organs
 of the other: "My my look at you!" Tempting is a rejoinder that reasserts the
 truth of self-consciousness, hoping that I, or those we ca re about, will some-
 how measure up.
     But what do we make of Equiano himself, as he becomes "almost" (but
 not quite) an Englishman, and thus would never be able to measure up from
 any perspective, let alone from the perspective of God who appears on the
 scene consequentially? As the Old Creature, remember, Equiano's senses fail
 him in every way possible and rehabilitation or even reparation can never
 appear fully on the horizon. At just this point Fred Moten pursues Equiano
 beyond double consciousness: "What I'm after," explains Moten, "is a kind
 of knowledge that moves from somewhere on the other side of either reason
 or experience, intelligibility or sensibility, and that is not reducible to any
 originary state of nature but for that improvisation of the human which is
neither the encoding of or embeddedness in responsibility" (299). 11 And yes,
I am also arguing that embeddedness in responsibility must be negated as we
approach Equiano, because the terms of responsibility that would give him
some comfort and some sense of normalcy- for example, the "gratitude"
Equiano expresses toward his master-remain immeasurable and unten-
able.'2 After all, the slave master Equiano owes gratitude in this case is Mi-
chael Henry Pascal, who sells Equiano just when freedom seems within reach
(93-94). How does one measure gratitude like that? At the very least with
some measure of irony, which is how we must understand our opening pas-
sage composed by Equiano, of course, with full knowledge of the betrayal to
come: "Thanks a lot."
HEARING    ur   IN   i,QUIANo's   INTE/lESTING     NARllATIVE                 57

    This last temporality, prevenient, puts much of the "interesting" into
Equiano's interesting narrative because it finds a place for the untimely. Pre-
venient grace makes it interesting that Equiano fell unhurt from the ship's
ballast while fighting in the Seven Years' War, and it makes interesting other
instances that might not otherwise fit into the narrative structure of the sea
yarn, the travelogue, the picaresque saga, or even the standard conversion
narrative. 13 Equiano appeals to the reader: "I beg leave to relate another in-
stance or two which strongly raised my belief of the particular interposition
of Heaven, and which might not otherwise have found a place here, from
their significance" (87). 14 Th is narrative logic of prevenient grace does not
trump ontogenic or historical or prophetic temporalities, but it does suggest
all sorts of tangibles that turn out to be very interesting indeed. Equiano's
justification is not titillation but simply what he senses, or more precisely,
what he thinks he senses sketched out in the world: "In these, and in many
more instances [e.g., cheating death], I thought I could very plainly trace
the hand of God, without whose permission a sparrow cannot fall. I began
to raise my fear from man to him alone, and to call daily on his holy name
with fear and reverence" (88). C rucially this transition takes us from a nar-
rative sensibility- dear reader, notice this not that-to an emotion, fear, as it
is displaced from the narrative per se and reoriented toward God. More on
this fear later as it makes room for Equiano's happy situation here on earth.
    Nevertheless, Equiano happily situated just about ten pages prior recalls
blandly the passage of calendar time: it was now between three and four years
since he first came to England. And as our theories of situated cognition and
our new sciences of happiness would have it, this mere passage oftime should
in fact make a real difference. In their work on "Norm Theory: Comparing
Reality to Its Alternatives," for instance, Daniel Kahneman and Dale Miller
discuss the phenomenon they call "emotional amplification," which states
that the affective response to an event is enhanced, relative to the response
to the same events when they are normal and expected. The special displea-
sure or pleasure derived from abnormality-say Helen has switched to a
new cereal which she likes much better than the one she had consumed for
a long time-will inevitably disappear as the norm gradually changes to re-
flect Helen's new routine. 15 Similarly over time, let us say with Kahneman,
Equiano becomes inured to the services he provides as a slave, and a stranger
to terrors of every kind. As Kahneman and Miller might analyze Equiano's
situation at that point, the availability of counterfactuals "define[s] the grain
of his experience" and so with the mere passage of years on the calendar,
Equiano's expectation that he would return to his previous life in Africa-
that is, the compelling counterfactual, "what might have been"-dissipates,
58                                                              C HAPTER TWO

along with the novelty of his captivating terrors. All of this sets the stage for
Equiano's relative happiness, which might appear practically plausible given
his narrative-let's call it objective-and also subjective and felt, as Equia no
himself attests. At the same time Equiano's rather insipid attestation about
how he felt might place him on what psychologists call the "hedonic tread-
mill," which explains why improving circumstances have diminishing returns
 (the classic examples from the 1970s are tied to the surprising unhappiness of
lottery winners and the paraplegic's "surprising" lack of unhappiness 16 ). "In
 contrast to pleasures," summarizes Kahneman, "comforts ultimately pro-
 duced no significant hedonic experience at all" (13). Or in lay terms we adapt
 over time, which means that becoming a paraplegic must be distinguished,
 qualifies Kahneman, from being a paraplegic, which is focused around nor-
 malcy of a different sort (16). Does hedonic psychology help us understand
  -:.quiano's adaptation to the life of a slave after some initial horror?17
      No doubt Kahneman works out an important awareness, including his
   bservation that counterfactual emotions, such as regret and frustration, guilt
 and envy, as well as relative happiness, calibrate to what might have been,
 practically speaking-but also in the sense that speaks directly to the human-
 ities where possibility has greater range than practicality per se. Is Equiano's
 pleasure in becoming almost an Englishman and his frustration in becoming
 almost an Englishman practical? Says who? Says Equiano in a deeply rhe-
 torical situation writing for Englishmen and women, let us remember. And
 whence this scale whereby relative Englishness calibrates directly to relative
 happiness? If that scale exists it is only in the utilitarian imagination that was
 certainly relevant at the time-like the first edition of Equiano's Interesting
 Narrative, Jeremy Bentham's An Introduction to the Principle of Morals and
 Legislations was first published in 1789 (see chapter 4)-and serves now as an
 important reference point for Kahneman and his colleagues. In fact Kahne-
 man et al. rely heavily upon Bentham as they resurrect his understanding of
 experience utility against modern economic theory that considers it unmea-
 surable.18 The entire project of hedonic psychology-and much behavioral
 economics for which Kahneman won the Nobel Prize- might be described
as a Bentham rescue effort that would make experience utility measurable but
on the newly sophisticated terms of relative not absolute measurement, and
thereby render experience a legitimate object of scientific inquiry (xi). So we
have a formula that sketches emotion studies across the disciplines: experi-
mental sciences are now centrally interested in the predictably irrational,1 9
social sciences in the practically irrational, and humanities in the possibly
irrational- that is, how emotions figure the world around limit-cases that
qualify our common sense. It turns out that some of the best work in emo-
 BllARING   UP   IN   EQUIANO'S   INTERESTING       NARRATIVE                   59

  tion studies worries about how these sometimes separate academic domains
  impinge upon each other, paying special attention to everyday discomforts
  that are familiar but don't conform neatly with our academics as they have
 developed postwar. 20 Now, an example.
      Reviewing the difficult question of whether his Good/ Bad bipolarity
 makes sense as a measure of happiness, Kahneman in chapter 1 of his foun-
 dational textbook Well-Being worries about how to discuss relative pleasures
 in the same breath with pleasures of any other kind. Can we measure reduc-
 tion in distress or pain (Bad) on the same scale with pleasures and happiness
 (Good)? "There is little hope of resolving this problem by introspection,"
 Kahneman admits, "but good reason to believe that the relation between di-
 minishing pain and pleasure will eventually be clarified by studies of relevant
 brain activity" (9).21 Coeditor Norbert Schwarz (with Fritz Strack) worries in
 similar fashion about how the results obtained in different well-being studies
 offer limited comparabili ty, with cognitive science offering some last-minute
 hope. Their list of complicating factors is long and wonderfully tied to re-
search studies that admittedly don't add up. They also provide a veritable
 taxonomy of social experiment rhetoric. Some of the key factors complicat-
ing reports of subjective well-being include the following: question-order
effects (63), conversational norms (e.g., speakers are expected to provide in-
formation that is new to the recipient, 64) , irregular chunking of one's life
into episodes that color a particular response ( 65), availability of counterfac-
tuals (67), direction of comparison (68), social improvement expectations
(e.g., things will get better, 71), comparison with others who are supposed to
share a similar fate (72), attention manipulation in the context of survey or
interview (74), and fi nally, reporting conventions that entail self-censoring
(77). "Nearly any aspect of one's life can be used in constructing representa-
tions of one's 'life now' or a relevant standard, resulting in many counterin-
tuitive findings" ( 69), summarize Schwarz and Strack as if they were reading
Equiano on his happy slave situation. Subjective well-being reports are not a
direct function of one's "objective conditions of life and the hedonic value of
one's experiences" (70 ). Like other social judgments, they are best considered
"constructions in response to particular questions posed in a particular time"
(79). Indeed. So what should the hedonic psychologists do about this meth-
odological challenge? Like Kahneman, Schwartz and Strack punt as their
chapter ends: "If we want to avoid misinterpretations of method effects as
substantive effects in this as well as other areas of psychological and social re-
search, we need to learn more about the cognitive processes that underlie the
reports that our respondents provide" (So). But instead of deferring to cog-
nitive science as a magic bullet of some unknown futurity, why not further
60                                                             C HAPTER    TWO


legitimate a methodology around these profound rhetorical insights they of-
fer right now? No amount of cognitive science will ever adequately explain
Equiano's happiness, or anything like it. However the hedonic psychologist's
deep sensitivity to context, variables-many of them rhetorical- can help
in ways heretofore lost on the humanities as well.
      As my chapter 4 discussion of Kahneman on mixed feelings will detail,
even Kahneman himself shows limited faith in such cognitive science-fiction
 while he develops the basic outline for a better scientific model that also re-
 jects a common metric of Good / Bad value- a model that does allow for the
comparison of values across contexts. For Kahneman, we w ill find, mixed
 feelings are not calculable intermediates but rather ambivalencies that refer-
 ence multiple points subject to what he calls, depending upon the example,
 negotiation or "persuasion." But for the time being it might be enough to
 ask the question simply as Kahneman disarms his skeptics: "How happy
 was Helen in March?" Now n.,reaked for our purposes: "Was Equiano really
 happy?" That question is not easy to answer and just one of the compli cations
  is a matter of time as it takes shape rhetorically. Equiano says he was happy.
 Or rather he writes that he was happy ... wrote that he was happy. O r rather
 he wrote that he considered himself happy. Or rather he wrote that he consid-
 ered himself happily situated thus implying that in fact he should have been
  happy given his situation but was not "really happy" whatever that might
 mean in this case. Finally, at this point in the Narrative Equiano might have
 been situated as a slave merely "by chance"- and not with any particular
 good feeling or fortune-which in the English eighteenth century served as a
 synonym now largely forgotten. 22
      Does aU ofthis retrospection and revision and mixed feeling make Equia no
 the worst kind of unreliable reporter, exactly the kind of reporter scientific
 psychologists are carefully sidestepping as they develop techniques for "eco-
 logical momentary assessment" (e.g., Smartphone survey app + wearable
 biosensors) designed to eliminate the retrospective distortion of data?23 If we
could hook up Equiano would we want to, and what kind of data would that
give us compared to the data that are lost by so doing? In this case I would
argue, Equiano's retrospection and revision actually give us the phenomenon
in the first place and it would virtually disappear otherwise. An interest in the
ecology of emotion is indeed shared by scientists and folks in the humani-
ties, but in Equiano's case the relevant ecology is a rhetorical dimension ut-
terly lost on any methodology tied to momentary assessment; in fact, from
the perspective of humanities and some social studies research "ecological
momentary assessment" is an oxymoron. Whatever the discipline-specific
definition, human ecologies must account for temporal factors that exceed
 REARING    U P   I N   EQ U I AN o ' s   INTEllEST/NG   N /lRIU\TIVE           61

 the momentary. Then in positive terms: Equiano's case demands rhetorical
 analysis just as the scientist of psychology Daniel Kahneman implies in his
 work on well -being reports--which are anchored to some specific life domain
 query- and as be demonstrates explicitly in work on mixed feelings, which
 accurately describe Equiano's situation at that point in the narrative.
     Likewise theorists of situated cognition have typically come up with rhe-
 torical solutions only as last resort, while for those who are more empirically
 minded, the unity of experience has greater appeal because it holds out the
 prospect of a common m etric. Returning to our foundational excerpt from
 Merleau-Ponty, they can emphasize the well-being that appears before illness:
 the intentional arc projects roundabout as our past and our future, bringing
 about the unity of our senses, intelligence, our sensibility and motility, our
 "being situated." And in this unity we can establish a common metric for
 measuring different sorts o f beings- no rhetoric needed. Then Alva Noe, in
 Out of Our Heads, emphasizes the complex relationship between the human
 organism that matu res day after day, and the life challenges that disrupt any
 easy progression and might instigate a kind of retrogression like, we might
observe, Equiano's first baptism through the watery middle passage. Perhaps
 rhetoric has a central place after all.
    In Varieties of Presence, Alva Noe makes the argument for a rhetoric of
experience explicit. Starting with the example of traditional art like song or a
painting, Noe explains how mere perceptual exposure is not yet aesthetic ex-
perience. Only " through looking, handling, describing, conversing, noticing,
comparing, keeping track, we achieve contact with the work/world" (125). 24
But this kind of contact with the world is not neutral; following Kant it falls
in the domain of " ought": our response reflects our sense of how one ought
to respond to a work of art, for instance. Hence rhetoric as persuasion: "aes-
thetic experience happens only where there is the possibility of substantive
disagreement, and so also the need for justification, explanation and persua-
sion" (126). Is such persuasive rhetoric relevant only to traditional art forms
per se? No - and this is Noe's bold move: he is really working on perceptual
experience " tout court" (128), with art recapitulating the basic fact about per-
ceptual consciousness and serving as a model or "guide to our basic situa-
tion." "Perception is not a matter of sensation; it is never a matter of mere
feeling," Noe summarizes. Instead, perceiving is "an activity of securing ac-
cess to the world by cultivating the right critical stance," or even more direct:
human experience has a "rhetorical structure" (128). How do we miss this,
according to Noe? "The big mistake," he explains, "is the overlooking of the
aesthetic, or critical, character and context of all experience. There is no s11ch
thing as how things looked independently of this larger context of thought,
                                                                   C HAPTER TWO


feeling and interest [classical rhetoric would similarly list the goals of rheto-
ric: docere, movere, delectnre]. This is plain and obvious when we think of the
e>..-perience of art. It is no less true in daily life" (129). So concludes Noe, when
something like the Milller-Lyer illusion (lines look different in length even
when I know they are the same) is supposed to show that perceptual experi-
ence cannot be logically structured in the way that the corresponding belief is
structured, we are making a "rhetorical context" mistake.
     Noe's interesting narrative takes shape in a philosophical form that could
offer Equiano's interesting narrative as a proof text. I will now quote at some
length a passage from the earlier work Out of Our Heads, because here Noe
exemplifies sophisticated situated cognition theory as it appears in a strain of
mainstream philosophy that references Merleau-Ponty, as well as J. J. Gibson
and Martin Heidegger. Noe thus reinforces the core of my book because his
analysis takes for granted some basic comforts as he works, eventually, to-
 ward rhetoric. Noe (51 in italics below) writes about emergent consciousness
 and I'll respond with Equiano line-by-line:
    [Noe] Maturation is not so much a process ofself-individ11atio11 and detachment
    as it is one ofgrowing comfortably into ones e11viro11me11t11l situation.

 Equiano considers himself happily situated; a contemporaneous account says
 the Igbo require the gentlest and mildest treatment to "reconcile them to
 their situation" (2431160). But Equiano has a rejoinder: "Might [African in-
 feriority] not naturally be ascribed to their situation? Does not slavery itself
 depress the mind?" (45). It is as if this passage were plucked straight out of
situated cognition theory a la Noe: consciousness is not something that hap-
pens in us; it is something we do in an environment that might be friendly,
or I would add following Equiano, might be hostile. The situation where we
are "locked in" need not be something innocuous like a dance, to cite a key
example from Noe, but rather something terrible like slavery where Equiano
is sometimes locked in, or locked up, or locked down, literally. 25
    [Noe] We grow apart, but we attach to the world without. We integrate.

Equiano is almost an Englishman.
   [Noe] In learning to walk or mastering language, in developing friendships. in
   acquiring an occupation, in learning to navigate and use technology, we root
   ourselves in the practical environment.

Equiano "attaches" to his master, gets his sea legs, learns English, acquires an
occupation, learns to navigate a ship and use technology as he roots himself
in the practical environment.
 REARING    UP   IN   EQUIANo's       INTER E STING        NJ\RIU\TJVE                     63

   !Noe] T/ris is one reason, certainly, why radical changes to one's environment,
   especinlly occurring Inter in one's life-for example, in the course of migrating
   from one country Jo another . . . are enormous, maybe even devastating personal
   c/ral/e11ges. The loss ofa feature of the environment with which one's daily activi-
   ties are intimately interwoven is the loss of a part of oneself

Before considering himself happily situated, Equiano-relatively late in his
life though still chronologically a child between 8 and u-experiences a radi-
cal change to his environment that includes migrating from one country to
another.

   [Noe] Another effect of this kind of disruption is that time, in an interesting, felt
   way, slows down.

 Equiano's happy situation can appear only after some duration that is marked
 on a calendar but under the general head ing of a long time--"between three
and four years" -in contrast to the moment-by-moment experience of a ter-
 rible rebirth that carries the language of complete disorientation, and "as-
 tonishment," when time practically stands still. OED etymology gives us the
Latin attonare: to strike with a thunderbolt, stun, stupefy. Obsolete meanings
include loss of sense, or insensibility.
     According to Noe, and Equiano I add, things take time-and especially
for Noe when disruption slows down time in an interesting, felt way. Brain
"rewiring" takes time, which is one of the reasons why Noe will look elsewhere
to explain a phenomenon like sensory substitution ( Out of Our Heads, 58).
Learning a language takes time while simultaneously it gives us time concepts
like dating, counting, and sequencing, which situate us materially (87). Our
ability to lock onto and keep track of the world takes time in the form of
practical skills (141). What are the feeling structures we find in Equiano's situ-
ation? As we have already seen, gratitude appears untenable, just as terror of
every kind becomes "strange."


                               Attachments I Feeling

Time must be taken before Equiano considers himself happily situated. But
as we have already seen, time is measured in terms of attachment/feeling.
Note in this now familiar sentence the necessary relationship between time
("always") and attachment/feeling: "my master treated me always extremely
well; and my attachment and gratitude to him were very great." Noe, for his
part, talks about mothers more than masters, but of course the two can blend
                                                                C H A P T ER TWO


into one another especially when the topic approaches birth, or rebirth in
the case of Equiano. "In a very real sense," explains Noe in the context of
finding comfort, "the baby-caretaker 'dyad' is a unity from which the child
only gradually emerges as an individual. We can speak of attachment here .. .
there is for us no such thing as complete detachment from the community
 of others and from the larger environmental structures in situations- lights,
 sounds, odors, ground, the air, technology-up against which we first be-
 come ourselves" ( Out of Our Heads, 51). For better and for worse, according
 to Noe, we are always already attached to others by the time we can con-
 ceive of our ourselves, and likewise for Noe, we are always already attached to
 larger environmental structures in situations that, 1 would add, may or may
 not serve our interests. For Noe as he invokes Merleau-Ponty, attachment
 is certainly a function of interest, but interest is understood in terms of our
 everyday and practical involvements: "This is the hand - my hand - whose
 movements I see when I look. Part of what makes it my hand is that I see it
 grasping the cup" (74). In other words, for Noe, m y hand is "attached" to me
 not merely because nerve tissue connects it to the brain; the famou s "rubber-
 hand" demonstrates otherwise as the subject can under certain circumstances
 feel where she isn't attached physically. Instead my hand is attached to me by
 way of coordination and "common fate." He cites Merleau-Ponty just at this
 point: "The body is the vehicle of being in the world, and having a body is, for
 a living creature, to be intervolved in a definite environment, to identify one-
 self with certain projects and be continually committed to them" (75 ). Feel-
 ing and time.
     No doubt feeling/attachment for Equiano speaks in this way to his prac-
 tical interest as he coordinates on board with his master, and as he shares a
 common fate that could sink both of them if fate would have it, or could let
 them live to see another day, with all that entails for these creatures who must
 make good use of the larger environmental structures in their shared situa-
 tion: lights, sounds, odors, ground, the air, technology, and so on lists Noe.
 But would it not be wrong if the interest of the slave is finally identified with
 the interest of his master? Wouldn't this kind of identification undermine the
 very distinction between master and slave, which depends upon interests that
are vested differently? A fine formulation from Carretta maps Equiano's posi-
tion with respect to the slave master, as opposed to the overseer who does not
share the owners' "vested interest in the well-being of the slaves."26 Then Car-
retta gives us Equiano precarious as a freeman still living in an environment
where race-based slavery predominates, and where freedom can be rescinded
at the drop of a hat because Equiano finds "no one with a vested interest in his
well-being" (Carretta biography, 122). Carretta notes the terrible irony that,
BE AR I N G   U P   IN   EQ U I A NO 's   I N T ERES TI NG   NARRATIVF.

  in some ways, Equia no is more secure as a slave. Security and attachment, in
 other words, must be understood in terms of vested interests that might work
 at cross purposes with the feelings involved: for example, Equiano might feel
 attached to the very set of relationships that subject him.27
      In fact this question of being was not lost on Merleau-Ponty himself,
 though it typically is lost by pragmatic philosophers who take him up like
 Hubert Dreyfus.28 Merleau -Ponty, in a crucial turn toward the "freedom" that
 occupies his last chapter, ventures thus: " It may even happen when I am in
 danger that my human situation abolishes my biological one, that my body
 lends itself without reserve to action" (84 ). And emphasizing this Hegelian
strand in Merleau-Pon ty- the very strand that is lost by pragmatic philos-
 ophers- we m igh t consider the slave perpetually "endangered" as he or she
 is subject to the master with in the environment where even a free person is
constantly threatened by the institutions and practices of race-based slavery.
As Equiano testifies, in this envi ronment the free black can be treated unfairly
without much recourse, kid napped, and resold or sold for the first time into
slavery. In this environment interests are vested differently, and life remains
unbearable even when a piece of paper attests to equality before the law. Other-
wise pu t, black freedom in this legal sense dissipates into the white world-a
world where, to put it mildly, so me are more comfortable than others. 29
     Merleau -Ponty, like Hegel, m akes the human situation-not biology-
fundamental, which is why literature (l ike Equiano's narrative) can be a good
model of consciousness and ca n provide a rich environment for analyzing
experience. "Co nsciousness takes root in being and time by taking up a situ-
ation," explains Merleau -Ponty, and his best example comes from Proust.
"Proust shows how Swann's love for Odette causes the jealousy which, in
turn , modifies his love, since Swann, always anxious to win her from any pos-
sible rival, has no time to really look at O dette" (425). In this case, "looking"
for love takes shape in a manner substantially unavailable to either the cog-
nitive or the social sciences; Proust's novel shows how a particular form of
consciousness takes root in being and time by taking up a situation detailed
most appropriately in the long form of a literary fiction. Below I will note
how Merleau -Ponty qualifies the priority of our human situation over the
biological: it is episodic. But first I'll spend some time with Merleau-Ponty's
Hegel, who first showed how a human situation like Equiano's might require
work in the humanities including the analysis of literature both fiction and
"non-" fiction.
     Remember for Hegel, in that famous section from the Phenomenology
of Spirit, master and slave (lord and bondsman) emerge historically as such
when a social relationship becomes essentially unbalanced, or to be more
66                                                               C HAPTER T WO

precise, when mutual acknowledgment- A11crke11111mg- is foreclosed not
just ideologically, but materially. 30 Let us recall Hegel directly. In ,186 self-
consciousness first appears in its immediacy and is not "risen above the bare
 level of life" (a bit like Dreyfus or Noe on self-consciousness31 ) ; it is deeply
 absorbed in the business of living and lacks perspective, as Findlay glosses the
 passage, because it lacks recognition. Perspective is first achieved, according
 to Hegel ,187, as the negation of all mere objectivity, and particularly the ne-
 gation whereby I am not a thing and I have things for mysel f, by way of objec-
 tifying and even destroying others. But to destroy everything else would be to
 destroy myself as well, since I am only by way of acknowledgment, and thus
 the other must be preserved in some form (,188) . Precisely at this point, for
  Hegel, the bondsman and the lord appear as such, at the same time that their
  identity, their original sameness, becomes obscure: " there is posited a pure
  self-consciousness, and a consciousness which is not purely for itself, but for
  another, i.e., as an existent consciousness, consciousness in the form and
  shape of thinghood" {,189). But crucially, as critical theorists have long read
  the Phenomenology of Spirit, this new master-slave relationship is essentially
  unequal (,191), and has with in it not only the seeds of a m aterial world but
  also the seeds of its own undoing. No balance, no pragmatic "equilibrium"
  or ecological homeostasis here, even after some time. Findlay provides some
  helpful language as he glosses ,191: "We thus achieve an essentially unbal -
  anced relationship in which the bondsman altogether gives up his being-for-
 self in favour of the lord. The lord uses him as an instrument to master the
  thing for his own (the lord's) purposes, and not for the bondsman's, and the
 bondsman acquiesces in the situation, and becomes in fact part and parcel
 of the total objective situation." But because the lord's self-consciousness is
 now materially bonded insofar as its relationship with the objective situation
 is mediated by another, it turns out to be the reverse of what it wants - that
 is, absolute independence. Thus Hegel concludes at this moment in his dia-
 lectic ,193: "The truth of the independent consciousness is accordingly the
 consciousness of the bondsman."
     Noteworthy for our purposes is the essential inequality of this relation-
ship that does not tend toward homeostasis, nor is it a matter of human
rights, where human beings initially share everything that counts, and thus
renewed balance or equilibrium has a minimum threshold, like a living wage
or equality before the law. Instead, for Hegel, the bondsman becomes "part
and parcel of the total objective situation." The bondsman does not share
with the lord what counts, but instead becomes part of the world in a new
way, not comfortably or "deeply absorbed in the business of living," but
rather degraded and distorted as part of the objective situation that includes
 nEARING   U P   IN   EQUIANO's    INTIIRF.STING     NARRATIVE

  the things made and the worldly stuff encountered as the bondsman goes
  about his or her busincss.32 Both objectively as a thing in the world, and sub-
  jectively as consciousness, the world itself appears to the bondsman muted,
 just as the bondsman appears to the world. This Hegelian mutation could
  not be righted simply with a living wage or equality before the law, and we
 see how Equiano grapples with this impossibility. Things don't "flow" or tend
  toward homeostasis. They cannot resolve through the detached philosophies
 of stoicism and skepticism in '"198-, 206, and they cannot be absorbed as the
 "unhappy consciousness" devoted to "the discordant clang of ringing bells,
 or a cloud of warm incense" through which the religious beyond is merely
 felt in '"217. No r can the objective world become a sensuous certainty sim-
 ply looked at, experienced in itself, without having arrived in some form.33
 Instead the Hegelian mutation lives on around the vitality of negation that is
 not complete. Remember for Hegel complete destruction of the other would
 be complete destruction of the self because I am only by way of acknowledg-
 ment, and moreover it is the bondsman who lives most immediately through
 acknowledgment, though degraded. This is why in the bondsman Hegel finds
 the (muted ) truth of independent self-consciousness.
     This is also why Merleau-Ponty, unlike Noe and his more pragmatic col-
 leagues, retains some critical perspective from which normal involvements
 might appear "queer," if we, like Sara Ahmed, want to make something of
Smith's translation from the French. 34 Normal involvements find one part
 and parcel of the total, objec_tive situation; the retinal image gives us a world
 right side up, for instance. But all of a sudden the objectivity of that situation
can seem queer-in this example when the retinal image inversion experi-
 ment ends- or fall apart, "go limp" at the level of my body. But the objective
situation also goes limp as illness of the social body comes to a head; that is
the point Merleau-Ponty makes in an extraordinary, and extraordinarily long
three-page footnote at the end of his chapter on "The Body in Its Sexual Be-
ing." "As in the case of the individual life, sickness subjects a man to the vital
rhythm of his body, so in a revolutionary situation such as a general strike,
factors governing production come clearly to light, and are specifically seen
as decisive" (172m ) . For Merleau-Ponty, insofar as he is a Hegelian in the
Marxist line of interpretation,35 the intentional arc that projects roundabout
any particular being, or rather which "results in our being situated," never
comes to completion. Hence, being itself can never be self-satisfied no matter
how "happily situated" being might appear at any given moment, and this
Equ iano understood full well, as his narrative demonstrates. In the remark-
able passage opening this chapter, Equiano appears much like Hegel avant
la lettre, with his happy situation appearing on the page as a set of attach-
68                                                               C HAPTER TWO
                                                                                       I
ments to the "absolute" of a slave master-service inured, self-considered,
well treated, grateful, and almost English - just as the palpable irony of that
attachment redounds. Situation "unhappy" indeed. Or from the Hegelian
perspective that seems unavoidable in this case, Equiano's interesting narra-
tive allows us to grasp how a happy situation is qualified.
    How does Equiano's happy situation measure up to our science of happi-
ness as it is developed by pioneers in the field Daniel Kahneman et al.? Can
we make any sense of a scientific conclusion that says somewhere between
10 and 15% variance in levels of happiness is due to demographic factors like

ethnicity? 36 And how can we move from an aggregate like this to someone
in particular like Equiano, whose happiness variance says a lot but not most
obviously "10-15%"? Instead we find that Equiano's happy situation is best
understood rhetorically, which distinguishes it from either subjective hap-
piness or "Objective Happiness," as the title of our key Kahneman textbook
introduction reads.
     "Rhetoric" in this case means a couple of things. One is effective, which is
 to say Equiano's happy situation appears in the narrative consequentially; it
 does not describe first and foremost. Its design to do something is controlled
 only partially by authorial intention and discernible by the reader only at the
 risk of committing the intentional fallacy.37 Instead most obviously, the pas-
 sage asks for some kind of a response from the reader, but a response irreduc-
 ible to simple identification. No doubt such identification is one possibility
 suggested by reading practices of the time. In his Rambler 60 (13 October
 1750) Samuel Johnson sketches the proper subject for such narrative writing:
 "Our passions are therefore more strongly moved, in proportion as we can
 more readily adopt the pains or pleasure proposed to our minds, by recog-
 nising them as once our own, or considering them as naturally incident to
 our state of life. It is not easy for the most artful writer to give us an interest
 in happiness or misery, which we think ourselves never likely to feel. ... " 38
 So this theory of identification, implied by Carretta's footnote, would have it
 that Equiano's narrative of happiness and misery calibrates to the intended
 reader whose sympathetic passions could produce actions like supporting the
abolitionist cause. Questions about practical identification a la Johnson-the
similarly classed naturally share incidents-are begged, which leaves only a
very different kind of identification before the eyes of God. Even such simple
identification, therefore, doesn't strictly require sincere emotion reported
transparently; required is only that the reader adopts some modest "pro-
posal." But at the same time identification is not so simple. A reader moved
to abolition by Equiano's narrative need not feel happy or miserable with
Equiano, whom we are not sure feels one way or another anyway: he quali-
BEARING    UP   IN   EQ U IA N o's   /NT£R£S1'/NG   NA/Ill.AT/VE


 fies, ironizes, looks back and forth artfully. Moreover a reader's response need
 not identify; Aristotle understood that tragedy can be a source of pleasure for
 instance. The design itself carries rhetorical force by inhabiting conventions.
At the same time the author Equiano figures the convention ironically, which
 makes sense only in relation to his life story, which is to say you have to read
 the story or at least know the setup for the irony to appear. The emotion is
 rhetorical in that it requires, to appear as such, a reader or audience broadly
conceived.
     Second, " rhetorical" in this case means that the emotion-pathos in the
classical lexicon - is not first and foremost something Equiano feels, for ex-
ample, happy, nor is it something observed like a smile or a positive disposi-
tion; instead, it posits a social relationship. Notice that Equiano does not feel
happy but instead finds himself, ironically, in a happy situation, which posits
an attitude toward: the scene of subjection 19 (-terror), the master-slave rela-
tionship (-gratitude), and a type of social identity (-quite English). In other
words, this happ y situation would be lost on anyone who isn't paying atten -
tion; it is rhetorical - and it cannot function primarily as an assessable state-
description. Even Kahneman's " dense record of the quality of experience at
each point-i nstant u tili ty" could not give us an assessment of Equiano's ob-
jective happiness over a period of time (3). And it would be an understate-
ment to say that Equiano's positive emotions do not unequivocally "signify
that life is going well, the person's goals are being met, and resources are ad-
equate," as Ed Diener and his colleagues might surmise on their way to a
theory of the happy human organism. 40 More promising is Kahneman's work
on how well-being reports are anchored, which is precisely the sort of rhetori-
cal analysis invited by Equiano's narrative, as I'll demonstrate (see chapter 4).
     So far we've looked at how time cannot add up for Equiano, and how
attachment comes at a price- one might call these Hegelian or "negative"
phenomena. But what about the world as given and the things in it? Isn't this
how, as pragmatic philosophers might argue, we must find our comfort zone
even in the most trying of times? Things normalize, don't they, because an
unbearable situation is unsustainable? Next we will take a look at how, for
Equiano, the world and all things do indeed "bear up." And once again my
approach will be a kind of critical phenomenology, where in this case I pay
attention to the ways in which a world and all things can be given (to a slave).


                                     Bearing Up

What appears given? For the philosopher Alva Noe, what is given depends
upon the relationships we bear, including human and nonhuman: "We bear
70                                                                C HAPTER     TWO


a relation to the house: the house itself, the back no less than the front (or the
front, no less than the back), is within reach" ( Out of 011r Heads, 83).'11 Simi-
larly Ahmed starts with philosophical discourse and she pays careful attention
to what is given virtually: "picture this ... ," "For instance I see that ... " (25);
objects gather along certain lines not others. Then following Merleau-Ponty,
Ahmed moves in exemplary fashion from neutered philosophical discourse
 to sexuality where things appear different. Now the world of heterosexuality
 appears given, the object of desire appears this way not that (87). Moreover
 in a world where heterosexuality is normative, Ahmed qualifies, some objects
 not others appear to be the appropriate object of desire , which also means
 that we will have experiences that register precisely by way of their orienta-
 tion, which may reference the norm even when failing to orient properly. In
 the tradition of critical theory running from Louis Althusser through Judith
  Butler, Ahmed can also put this in terms of sense perception: our orientation
 depends upon taking certain points of view as given. Certain things and not
 others become available and come into view-the subject turns, or is turned,
 one way and not another (14, 165). Now you might guess where I am going
  with this, as I return to Equiano.
      A methodological point: This is one way we can read narrative literature,
  and Equiano's interesting narrative in particular. We can ask: What appears
 given to Equiano? What objects appear in the narrative and what does their
 appearance say about Equiano's orientation in a world turned this way not
  that? How are givens revealed by tracking what Equiano senses? As we see in
  this chapter by way of Equiano, narrative literature does an especially good
 job reconstituting and hence revealing for analytic purposes the complex re-
 lationships between the objective world and experience, as this relationship
 takes shape in character. In a formula, books are orientation devices - they
 do something-and some books are largely about just this orientation pro-
 cess. So, for example, Equiano's Interesting Narrative is abolitionist, and the
 way it is abolitionist is by offering the orientation that makes abolition neces-
 sary. If you read the story, then abolition makes sense. The strong argument
 is that a legal event-abolition-can appear as such only when oriented, and
orientation in this case requires not just some version of a mariner's quad-
rant, but a narrative. Let us see how this works in detail, as Equiano gets his
bearing.
     The world bears down upon Equiano after he is "deceived by a promise of
being delivered" from slavery and instead finds himself sold to one Captain
Doran sailing for the dreaded West Indies. "In the first expressions of my
grief I reproached my fate, and wished I had never been born. I was ready to
curse the tide that bore us, the gale that wafted my prison, and even the ship
 REARING    UP   IN   EQUIANo's       INTEIIESTING         NA/111 ,\'f/VE                  71

that conducted us; and I called on death to relieve me from the horrors I felt
and dreaded" (97). In this pair of beautifully adjacent sentences, Equiano
bears witness to his sense of being put upon, most dramatically. What's go-
ing on here stylistically, and does it matter? f'II argue quite a bit and yes; the
Oxford E11glish Dictionary sustains this linguistic network that Equiano's nar-
rative brings to bear in almost every sense, we will see, including the allitera-
tive sense born / bore that might seem merely stylistic. So now a brief OED
excursus, edited for our purposes.

   OED Bear (v.). A very old and widespread root across English and related lan-
   guages. Main senses: I. to carry; II. to sustain; III. to thrust, press; IV. to bring
   forth. 2b. To bear in mind. 2c. To bear witness. 3. To bear the cross [of Jesus].
   6a. To bear arms aga inst. 7b. To bear a name or 7c. an office. 9. To entertain a
   feeling, e.g. 1726 Swift Gulliver II. iii. ii. 27 "The Contempt they bear to practi-
   cal Geometry." 17. To bear with, be patient. 21. To bear up. To keep up one's
   courage or spirits; to maintain one's ground, e.g. 1796 E. Burke Lett. Peace
   Regic. Fra nce in W ks. (1842) IL 291 "Bearing up against those vicissitudes of
   fortune." 27. To bear down. 32. To bear upon or touch upon. 33. Bring to bear.
   37. In nautical phraseology, to sail in a certain direction e.g. bear away, bear
   down, bear o ff, bear up. Bearing (n.) 1. The action of carrying or conveying.
   2. The carrying of oneself, deportment, e.g. 1600 Shakespeare Much Ado abolll
   Nothing ii. i. 150 "That is Claudio, I knowe him by his bearing." 5. Sustaining,
   supporting, e.g. 1733 Pope Ess. Man i. 23 "Of this vast Frame the Bearings,
   and the Ties." 9. Tendency to exert influence, e.g. 1785 E. Burke Speech Nabob
   Arcot's Debts in W ks. IV. 201 "Having had .. . a just sense of their true bearings
   and relations." 13. To take one's bearings: to determine one's position with
   regard to surrounding objects; also fig. 17. Child-bearing.

So Equiano's tight alliteration in fact exploits morphology; born/bore ini-
tially gives us two interlocking dynamics. First it gives us a particular way of
(not) being in the world practically, as one bears a name. " While I was on
board this ship, my captain and master named me Gustavus Vassa. I at that
time began to understand him a little, and refused to be called so, and told
him as well as I could that I would be called Jacob; but he said I should not,
and still called me Gustavus; and when I refused to answer to my new name,
which at first I did, it gained me many a cuff; so at length I submitted, and was
obliged to bear the present name, by which I have been known ever since"
(64). From the equivocation in the book title-Equiano or Gustavus Vassa-
his name bears practical witness to the profound problem of knowing who
he is. Not in some self-help sense that grounds us, or grounds Equiano and
bolsters his self-confidence as he waits for a chance to realize his dreams: a
"self-made man" as we read in the title of Carretta's biography. Equiano does
72                                                               C HAPTER TWO

 not know who he is precisely insofar as he is excluded from the systems of
 knowledge that make one's identity intelligible. Not free, not equal, not quite
 an Englishman, indeed not human in the ways that count. And not ever, as
 Afro-Pessimism has recently argued in the face of an affirmation that would
 give black people a piece of the action.~z
     I like to imagine Equiano recognizes some bitter humor in these circum-
 stances when he includes verbatim in his narrative not one but two "certifi-
 cates of behavior" that bear his name (again our keyword ). The first certifi-
 cate Equiano requests from Robert King: "] then requested he would be kind
 enough to give me a certificate of my behaviour while in his service, which he
 very readily complied with, and gave me the following." The certificate reads:

     Montserrat, January 26, 1767.
     The bearer hereof, Gustavus Vassa, was my slave for upwards of three years,
     during which he has always behaved himself well, and discharged his d uty
     with honesty and assiduity.
                                                                  ROBERT KING.

                                                 To all whom this may concern.

 And once again Equiano appears truly grateful: "Having obtained this, I
 parted from my kind master, after many sincere professions of gratitude and
 regard, and prepared for my departure for London" (163 - 164). In this case
 the system of knowledge that makes Equ iano's identity intelligible- the cer-
 tificate of behavior-bears upon him as the most flimsy sort of attachment,
a written voucher referencing a certain Gustavus Vassa, who supposedly
 behaved himself well as a slave, whatever that means, for whomever it may
concern. At the same time this certificate is worth its weight in gold and for
it, Equiano expresses the deepest gratitude. What kind of bearing upon the
world is this?
     The natality-sustainability dynamic is also practical with respect to
Equiano's familiar surroundings. As the tide bore Equiano in his ship, which
is to say "prison," he is wafted about as he loses his bearing with respect to
everything that gave him hope: the "wished-for" land he loses sight of, Brit-
ish law banning slavery on the military ship where he had just served, the
law prohibiting a sale like the one he has just suffered, the financial equity he
thought earned toward his self-purchase (93), and most importantly his mas-
ter Pascal's promise that Equiano might be freed. We can gloss this broken
promise with Ahmed, who helps us understand how at this point Equiano
is undone not just by a promise gone awry, but by his very exclusion from
the social world that might give his servitude some kind of meaning however
debased. Following directions, explains Ahmed, normally takes the form of
BEARI N G   U P   I N   EQ U IANO ' s   I N TERESTING NARRATIVE                 73

 commitment, a social investment that promises return (17). If we faU into
 line as we are pressed into some kind of social service, our commitment will
 be rewarded if only by way of some recognition that we are living in a certain
 way. But what ifwe are pressed into service outside the domain of consent or
 even beyond the social contract per se? Here we must amend Ahmed. For in
 Equiano's case, the service into which he is pressed bears false witness to the
 promise that he would be freed after fulfilling some kind of social contract,
 whether that means becoming almost an Englishman, buying his freedom, or
 even, via baptism, cleansing his soul before the eyes of God and thus joining
 the Christian fellowship where everyone is equal. No wonder Equiano was
 ready to curse the tide that bore him, even to curse God, as Equiano wished
 he were never born.
      And this gets us to a second, crucial dynamic at work in this passage.
 Equiano takes his bearing with respect to the practical world where he is sadly
 disappointed to the point where he curses his own birth. But then again this
 passage is given to the reader in retrospect and with qualifications: "in the
 first expressions of my gr ief [but not thereafter] I reproached my fate ... I
was ready to curse [but did not ]." So at the same time that Equiano bears
witness to his life-threatening misery as it is attached to the practical world
that pressed down upon him, he qualifies that misery as something he could
ultimately bear, as in "carry" (OED main sense I). Clearly Equiano sustains
himself thro ugh this episode (OED main sense II) since we are reading his
retrospection. Ultimately he is patient (OED 1.17). One might even say his suf-
fering at this point shows Equiano bearing the cross for Jesus in a manner he
could barely recognize at the time. So we should now take another moment
to qualify Ahmed. No doubt Equiano's practical world provides orientation,
or in this case disorientation. Ahmed might say body and object "point" to-
ward each other along particular lines; Equiano is oriented by how he takes
up time and space, which in this case undoes him (Ahmed 5). He can't bear
it. However, at the same time, he is telling this story about the cross he could
bear after all, a story where he regrets the practical orientation that almost un-
did him. And that's the point of this story: sometimes a perfectly good practi-
cal orientation can be deadly, while life itself can hinge upon the impractical.
     Finally we might wonder, What exactly is the phenomenology ofEquiano's
born-again Christianity? And how might it square with our practical impera-
tives as they come out of science and philosophy? Equiano, having purchased
his freedom and converted, embarks March 1775 on board a ship bound for
Cadiz (198-199). The ship strikes a rock and although Equiano cannot swim
he feels no dread in his "then situation" while these words come to mind:
74                                                                      C HAl-'TER    TWO


             Christ is my pilot wise, my compass is his word;
             My soul each storm defies, while I have such a Lord.
             I trust his faithfulness and power,
             To save me in the trying hour.
             Though rocks and quicksands deep through all my passage lie,
             Yet Christ shall safely keep and guide me with his eye.
             How can I sink with such a prop,
             That bears the world and all things up? 43

My plea at this point is we have to take seriously such practical limitations, or
to put this another way, we have to take seriously such impracticality where
Christ (not I) bears the world and all things up. In fact for Equiano, such
impracticality is a matter of life and death, as we see him narrate over and
over. The fullest version of this life-and-death narrative comes in the set piece
about Equiano's spiritual rebirth that I reproduce here with annotation and
underscoring of what Merleau-Ponty might consider the intentional arc re-
habilitated after going limp ("It is this intentional arc which brings about the
unity of the senses, of intelligence, of sensibility and motility" ).

       In the evening of the same day, as I was reading and meditating on the fourth
      chapter of the Acts, twelfth verse [Peter's miraculous escape from prison ],
      under the solemn apprehensions of eternity, and reflecting on my past ac-
      tions, I began to think I had lived a moral life, and that I had a proper ground
      to believe I had an interest in the divine favour; but still meditating on the
      subject, not knowing whether salvation was to be had partly for our own good
      deeds, or solely as the sovereign gift of God; in this deep consternation the
      Lord was pleased to break in upon my soul with his bright beams of heav-
      enly light; and in an instant as it were, removing the veil [also a metaphor of
      Du Bois], and letting light into a dark place, I saw clearly with the eye of faith
      the crucified Saviour bleeding on the cross on mount Calvary: the scriptures
      became an unsealed book, I saw myself a condemned criminal under the law,
      which came with its full force to my conscience, and when " the command-
      ment came sin revived, and I died" [ Romans 7:9 + 7:25 "I myself in my mind
      am a slave to God's law"], I saw the Lord Jesus Christ in his humiliation, loaded
     and bearing my reproach, sin, and shame. I then clearly perceived that by the
     deeds of the law no flesh living could be justified. I was then convinced that by
     the first Adam sin came, and by the second Adam (the Lord Jesus Christ) all
     that are saved must be made alive. It was given me at that time to know what
     it was to be born again, John 3:5. I saw the eighth chapter to the Romans [8:14
     "For those who are led by the Spirit of God are the children of God. The Spirit
     you received does not make you slaves, so that you live in fear again; rather,
     the Spirit you received brought about your adoption to sonship"], and the
     doctrines of God's decrees, verified agreeable to his eternal, everlasting, and
 B F. AR ING   V P   ! N   E Q U !A N o 's   I NT Elll3S TIN G   N AllllATIVF.            75
     unchangeable purposes. T he wo rd of God was sweet to my taste, yea sweeter
     than honey and the honeycomb. Christ was revealed to my soul as the chiefest
     among ten thousand. These heavenly moments were really as life to the dead,
     and what John call s an earnest o f the Spirit. This was indeed unspeakable,
     and l fir mly believe undeniable by man y. Now every leading providential cir-
     cumstance that happened to me, fro m the day I was taken from my parents
     to that hour, was then in my view, as if it had but just then occurred. I was
    sensible of the invisible hand o f God, which guided and protected me when
     in truth I knew it not: st ill the Lord pursu ed me although I slighted and disre-
    garded it; this mercy melted me down. When I considered my poor wretched
    state I wept, seeing what a great debto r I was to sovereign free grace. Now
    the Ethiopian was will ing to be saved by Jesus Christ [Acts 8:26], the sinner's
    only surety, and also to rely on none other person or thing for salvation. Self
    was obnoxious, and good works he had none, for it is God that worketh in us
    both to will and to do . T he am azing th ings of that hour can never be told-it
    was joy in the H oly Ghost! I felt a n aston ishing change; the burden of sin, the
    gaping jaws of hell, and the fears o f death, that weighed me down before, now
    lost thei r horror; indeed I tho ught death wo uld now be the best earthly friend
    I ever had. Such were my grief and joy as I believe are seldom experienced.
    (189- 190, my underline)


 Let us remember, first, this is a passage from a late chapter Mary Wollstone-
 craft famously panned after praising Equiano's first volume with its "blood-
 turning course." For Wollstonecraft the latter part of the second volume
 reads flat and she finds "the long account of his religious sentiments and
conversion to Methodism . . . rather tiresome. "44
    No doubt Wollstonecraft is right that Equiano's conversion narrative takes
conventional form as it might appear in the hands of any number of spiritual
autobiographers. It's a set piece in some ways, and reduced to its essence,
the allegorical structure of salvation runs the normal course: 1) godly sad-
ness, 2) rebirth, 3) challenge, and finally 4) manifestation of the new creature.
How exactly this passage "gives things" to Equiano is striking, however, and it
brings home our reading of the happy situation where we first found Equia no.
    Most importantly in this scene we witness how Equiano's senses-touch,
taste, sight-are "unified" as Merleau-Ponty would have it, beyond the prac-
tical world where life is impossible. Equiano dies, he is reborn. But is this
initial death a kind of spiritual illness before health is restored, do we wit-
ness Equiano going limp and losing his way before finding it once again?
Is Equiano happily re-situated as the philosophers and psychologists would
have it? The trick here, I think, is that Equiano's recovery and the unity of
his senses cannot be borne by himself, since that option is available only to
76                                                             C HAPTER TWO

someone who is already in comfortable conversation with the world as such.
We have seen how Alva Noe has claimed only "through looking, handling,
 describing, conversing, noticing, comparing, keeping track, we achieve con-
 tact with the work/world" (125). But what is this "rhetorical structure" of
 human experience when we are not already in comfortable conversation with
 the world? When the conversation is awkward at best and foreclosed in fact?
 A litany of the inoperable: Equiano reminds us that he lives in a world where
 a master might enslave his own progeny and hence the normal rules of blood
 filiation don't apply (109); where "every principle and all sentiments of vir-
 tue" are buried (no); where equality and independence, those "first natural
  rights of mankind," are violated (111); where there is no common ground or
 common currency through which one might communicate "one rational be-
  ing to another" (112); and where black speech can be better described as black
  infelicity-Equiano reminds us that throughout the West Indies "no black
  man's testimony is admitted, on any occasion, against any white person what-
 ever," which means that he had no recourse when his "kind master" Robert
  King shuffles instead of repaying a financial debt that Equiano desperately
  needs (161-162). Again, what is the rhetorical structure of human experience
 when the world is not conversable?
      The world as fallen for a slave, and Equiano in particular- the escaped
 prisoner, the slave to God's law, the Ethiopian-is fallen differently than it is
 for another kind of sinner; hence rebirth differs as well. As a slave, Equia no
 bears down on a world that is not his own; then Jesus bears everything. Suf-
 fice it to say in summary this is a very different kind of phenomenology that
 loses its bearing outside of the rhetorical situation broadly conceived, includ-
 ing both the no-go zones of common currency and conversation that would
 (but doesn't) give Equiano a voice in some traditional sense of public sphere
 representation. Also his loud statement as we have received it- his Interest-
 ing NarrativB--constantly challenges his reader to take the material at face
value even when he demonstrates over and over how that value is in some
basic ways phantasmatic and impossible to cash. We cannot bank upon the
fact that Equiano is really happy, truly grateful, and so on through the narra-
tive, as we are time and again thrown back upon the system that makes such
guarantees impossible. In the end Equiano is neither here nor there, neither
secured in the practical world where he does his business, nor in the spiritual
world where he tends. As such the narrative Equiano gives us is not tiresome
in the least, recalling the words of Wollstonecraft, but vivifying as only a nar-
rative of such improbability can be. And no further explanation should be
needed how a narrative such as this speaks directly to a science of emotion,
without reducing to it.
                                       3

           Hostile Environments in Ann Radcliffe's
                  The Romance of the Forest




 In this chapter we see how environments, technically understood via
J. J. Gibson, make people terribly uncomfortable to the point of becoming
unhinged. Or even " undone," as rape victim Antonia protests in Matthew
Lewis's The Monk (1796) just before narrative logic finishes her off: "Is not
my ruin completed? Am I not undone, undone for ever?" In fact the cause
of death in this instance, and more generally the terms of a life undone, find
their genre in the sentimental version of Gothic fiction where the emotional
scene is troubled. A narrative logic that Walpole, Monk, and especially Rad-
cliffe pursue vigorously shows how- in contrast to tragedy, which undoes
through character- domestic "scenes" and other human environments can
pose a real threat. In this chapter I will thus investigate how certain kinds of
narrative fiction provide rich material for the study of human environments,
especially in terms of the emotional dynamic. In this first section, I detail
some neighboring approaches so that the contrast with a more ecological
Gibsonian model is clear, followed by a reading of hostile environments as
they are defined legally in our contemporary workplace environment, and as
they appear in Ann Radcliffe's Gothic fiction . My ongoing argument is first,
that it matters very much what model of cognition one uses when studying
how human environments appear in literature, and second, that this special-
ized literary critical issue in fact lies at the crux of a significant encounter
between science and humanities.


Limitations of Literary Darwinism and Cognitive Approaches to Literature

Literary criticism is typically a special interest. But nonspecialists have also
paid attention to both literary Darwinism and cognitive approaches to litera-
                                                             C Ii A P T E n   T Ii It E E


ture, where basic methodological issues are worked out with consequences
for ongoing research, and even for certain kinds of social and educational
 policy. 1 Literary Darwinist Brian Boyd, for instance, proposes that an evo-
 lutionary view allows for "informed social change" (27, emphasis original)
 as he introduces his substantial account published in 2009 by the Belknap
 Press of Harvard University, 011 the Origin of Stories: Evolution, Cognition,
 and Fiction. What would this kind of social change look like? It is difficult to
 say because unlike Martha Nussbaum, who has parlayed a cognitive approach
 to literature into controversial social policy proposals, 2 critics like Boyd are
 typically demure as they let the reader extrapolate what kind of social change
 would be informed by the human nature they sketch. To that end we are of-
 fered some hints however: "Each offspring in our species should prefer to
 concentrate its parent's investment in itself," explains Boyd, while its parents
 "should prefer to maximize their genetic transmission to the next generation
 by offering, on average, equal investment in each of the present and future
 offspring" (55-56). What kind of informed social change might follow from
  this rehearsal of the literature on kin selection? Although Boyd doesn't say
  exactly, he expects us to extrapolate in this case from the principle of kin
  selection to expressions of human nature, whether that means a social in-
 stitution like marriage and family law, or an artifact like fictional narrative.
  "Hence we see why even in the most cooperative of relationships competition
 is inevitable, and why the powerful emotions engendered by family loyalty
 and conflict saturate stories from Genesis to The Sopra11os" (56). This great
 leap from the theory of kin selection to HBO leaves us to infer by way of
 analogy that the relevant social change would ... ( try finishing the sentence
 because I'm at a loss). Another would-be clue turns up in the section on "Fic-
 tion's Functions" where Boyd discusses how fiction improves the key mental
 mode of social cognition along with subsidiary functions arising from that
 fact. He gives us this curious sequence before breaking off: "Males have more
 reproductive variance than females ... therefore have on average a stronger
 drive than females to earn status . . . and therefore males [despite the likes
of Murasaki, Jane Austen, and J. K. Rowling) are overrepresented at both
extremes, success or genius, and failure, crime, mental illness, or drug de-
pendency" (195). Again what kind of social change might be informed by this
evolutionary view is, perhaps, better left unsaid. However, Boyd doesn't miss
the opportunity to tell us what kind of social change this won't be: Enlighten-
ment blank slate, romantic a la Rousseau (65), Marxist (387), or "paranoid"
in the traditions of Nietzsche and Foucault (66). The claim is that "Evolution
offers a much more complex and nuanced view of the social world" (65) . But
if evocritical and some cognitive approaches to literature are any indication,
HOSTI LE ENV IRO NMENTS         IN   RAD C LlFPE'S   ROMANCE                   79
  this promise of a better theory of social change starts on unstable ground be-
  fore it would have to navigate a rather daunting history of social Darwinisms
 gone awry. Perhaps that is why for the time being these critics are sticking to
  the arts-controversial eno ugh - while leaving vague the political program.
      J. /. Gibson's affordance theory provides a welcome alternative to certain
 Evocritical and Cognitive Approaches that are hampered by the operative
 model of cognition that toggles between the poles of a prehistoric architec-
 ture on one hand, and neuro-"plasticity" or flexibility on the other: a polarity
 that over- or under-shoots the analytic level appropriate to our phenomenal
 world as evident in literary artifacts. Again Boyd: "A biological view of hu-
 man nature stresses that individuals are free agents endowed with the flexibil-
 ity that evolution provides and active strategic choosers rather than passive
 products of their place and time." Meanwhile culture "occurs only within
 the social and therefore, again, the biological realm" (25) , which means that
 the force of cultural and critical interpretations of literature are blunted as
 they run up against the latest biological fact. Despite protests to the contrary
which I will revisit below, literary-critical paradigms (like psychoanalysis)
 that are grounded in the humanities, not biology, get squeezed out of the
 picture. "As a theory," Blakey Vermeule writes candidly by way of example,
"psychoanalysis is undeniably rich. As a story about the mind, however, it
 is laughable." 3 Another leader in these critical movements on the cognitive
side, Lisa Zunshine, worries more about losing her academic neighbors in
the English department, so her model is instead additive. In her Introduc-
 tion to Cognitive C ultural St11dies, 4 Zunshine insists that a cognitive turn in
literary criticism does not mean abandoning the traditional paradigms be
it gender studies, feminist criticism, postcolonial theory, poststructuralism,
performance theory, psychoanalysis, or cultural studies (4). But though these
paradigms m ight reappear in the critical literature, I will argue that they do
so on scientific grounds thereby undermining what is meant to be collabora-
tive work that respects the domain-specific relevance of the various critical
paradigms. So when Ellen Spolsky writes in the same Zunshine volume about
"Darwin and Derrida," for instance, troping, reinterpretation, and represen-
tation are understood not as literary devices with all the work that they can do
in the spirit of Paul de Man or Jacques Derrida, but rather as-what else-
"adaptations" consistent with a Darwinian theory of survival (306).
     Indeed Cognitive Approaches, along with its critical neighbor Literary
Darwinism, get much of their popular appeal from claims about human na-
ture, especially as they trigger some of our heated conversations around the
special topics of sex and gender, selfishness, and the biological origins of so-
cial life. At one end of the spectrum in literary studies we have a movement
So                                                         C HAPTER     THREE


that wants to explain how cultural phenomena like art and literature should
best be understood as the product of biological evolution. Boyd, in a response
to Jonathan Kramnick's Critical Inquiry ( Cf) polemic "Against Literary Dar-
winism" (2011), provides the following definition of the movement that he
 prefers to call evocriticism: "Evolutionary criticism argues that evolution has
 shaped human minds to be partially reshaped, not least by our species-wide
 predisposition to culture, to art in general, and to literature in particular.
 Evocritics show how the fact that human minds owe their structure to evo-
 lutionary pressures makes a difference to literature- to features of human
 minds and behaviors that literature deploys, represents, appeals to, engages,
 and modifies" ( CI 394). I will return to this definition, though a response to
 Literary Darwinism per se is not my objective; I focus, instead, on models of
 cognition that in some cases reject Literary Darwinism outright.
     Though Boyd and many of his colleagues maintain that evolutionary
 and cognitive approaches are only "different facets of a common process of
 inquiry" (9), they are in fact not identical, and I will emphasize how they
 differ significantly at the extremes where my critical work might be situated
 toward one end of the spectrum with evolutionary approaches at the other.
 As demonstrated in the definition above, moreover, Literary Darwinism has
 largely dissociated from the more radical forms of "orthodox" Evolutionary
 Psychology (EP), defined best by Leda Cosmides / John Tooby, David Buss
 ( Cl 397), and Steven Pinker ( CI 406) , while identifying with a broader field
 of evolutionary inquiry into human nature referred to as evolutionary psy-
 chology (ep, without caps). The key difference lies, it would seem, in three
 arenas worth rehearsing in the spirit of serious engagement. First is ep's new
 commitment to brain and mind plasticity or flexibility (399, 407), which
 is also a central tenet of recent cognitive approaches. Second is "multilevel
 selection," which acts above the gene at the level of organisms and groups,
 allowing an evocritic like Boyd to explain how fictions can enhance social
cohesion while he still can appeal to biological explanations ( Cl 399-400).
Third is gene-culture coevolution, where a paradigm for Joseph Carroll is
cooking (i.e., culture), which freed up for our prehistoric ancestors meta-
bolic resources for brain development-a paradigm that would extend to
literature and the other arts (i.e., culture), though he does not let on how the
analogy falters on genetic influence. There is no evidence that literature and
the other arts have, like cooking has, altered the human genome. Though it
takes the form of a causal claim, it is difficult to understand how exactly art
"transforms our instinct-driven organism into an organism that makes deci-
sions based on complex mental representations of the world," 5 and in fact it is
difficult to imagine exactly what kind of empirical evidence would make this
HOSTILE ENVIRONMENTS           IN   RADCLIFFl!'S    ROMANCE                   81

 quite specific causal claim testable. Though perhaps unfair, at this juncture I
 like to imagine a New Yorker cartoon with slime mold sitting in a comfy chair
 reading Bonner's The Social Amoebae.
     Hence a note on Literary Darwinism and scientific testability as opposed
 to some other evaluative standard. Transitioning to Book II, "From Zeus to
 Seuss: Origins of Stories," Boyd summarizes his naturalistic account of art
 and fiction where he argued that both are adaptations: "we have evolved to
 engage in art and in storytelling because of the survival advantages they offer
 our species" (209). This and related hypotheses "need to be tested empiri-
 cally against alternative explanations," Boyd continues. "But an evolutionary
 approach to literature does not depend on them or on any other hypotheses
 that claim art, literature, or fiction as adaptive. A biocultural approach to
 literature [P] simply requires that [Q ] we take seriously that evolution has
 powerfully shaped not just our bodies but also our minds and behavior. We
can do that whether literature or fiction is an adaptation, byproduct, or some
combination of the two" (209 - 210). Logicians call this fallacy affirming the
consequent (if P, then Q. Q. Therefore, P): If you are going to accept approach
P, then Q is required. Q is required; therefore you must accept approach P. But
in fact you may take seriously as I that evolution has powerfully shaped "not
just our bodies but also our minds and behavior" without in any way com-
mitting oneself to a biocultural approach to literature, which is something
else altogether. Wildly swinging at Theory with a capital "T," Boyd stumbles
down a similar path in his conclusion: "Unlike current Theory, evocriticism
prefers proposals concrete enough to be subjected to potential falsification by
evidence" and he offers that aspects of his own proposal for art as adaptation
could be falsified, for instance, if there were on average a negative correlation
between individual artistic success and status (388). But when it comes to
testing the validity of his literary criticism, Boyd admits that the evaluative
criteria change: "Claims within an evolutionary approach to literature can
hardly be 'proved' by application to literary works. Yet the fertility of such an
approach should be tested both on particular works and on literary theory. If
evocriticism cannot generate literary theory and criticism richer than those
possible through other models, it does not warrant the considerable effort of
learning enough about human evolution to apply it to literature" (388-389).
Wisely enough, evaluation of evocriticism per se hangs on judgment about
relative richness-never mind equivocation around the word "test"-and
on these terms I venture the ultimate judgment will not be kind.
     Taken together, all three retreats from orthodox EP would nevertheless
immunize Literary Darwinism against its critics like Kramnick, at the same
time that they would make room for criticism focusing on some of the finer
                                                              CHAPTER THREE

details of culture, politics, and creativity as they appear in literature. l will
 not highlight the persistent shortcomings of Literary Darwinism even after
 this turn away from orthodox EP, since those disputes are well-summarized
 in the exchange with Kramnick, and because my focus here is on operative
 models of cognition in current literary criticism. Though important, ongo-
 ing debates about art as either an evolutionary engine or byproduct, group
 selection, or the definition of "culture" in gene-culture coevolution, won't
 preoccupy insofar as the controversies are inherent to the theory and sci-
 ence of evolution. However, when it comes to the operative understanding of
 cognition, we will see, new ep finds significant overlap with CAL, especially
  in the appeal to neuroplasticity as a black box supervenient upon genetics. I
  will argue that cognitive approaches to literature, like ep, frequently preclude
  robust critical theories, despite efforts by some to honor these literary criti-
  cal traditions and appease skeptics. I will return to ep for another reason as
  well, as it offers a competing model of how and why hostile environments
  are depicted.
      For her part, Zunshine in her introduction to the Oxford Handbook of
  Cognitive literary Studies is adamant about the difference between cognitive
  literary critics and Literary Dar.vinists, rejecting consilience as it is embraced
  by Boyd in particular. 6 However these two critical approaches to literature
  frequently share methodological problems more trenchant than Zunshinc
 admits. The way Zunshine puts it, a "distinction between cognitive literary
 critics and Literary Darwinists is worth emphasizing because, while both
 draw on some of the same research in cognitive science (e.g., evolutionary
 theory), their views on the role of this research for literary studies are dia -
 metrically opposite." Here my point is to reverse this emphasis showing how
 shared cognitive science research in evolutionary theory can lead to some
 shared problems with respect to literary criticism. These two movements-
 CAL and ep-overlap significantly when they try to show how, in the words
 of Boyd, the fact that "human minds owe their structure to evolutionary
 pressures makes a difference to literature" ( CI 394).
      Let us grant that human minds owe their structure to evolutionary pres-
sures, and that literature is the product of human minds. Still the specific
charge is not met: namely to demonstrate what difference to literature such
evolutionary pressure makes. To do this, a critical difference in literary inter-
pretation must be identified, and this identification must be best explained
by way of an appeal to evolutionary pressure with enough detail to mark
this difference or class of differences, as opposed to others. The counterclaim
is that we are not talking about the possibility of a scientific demonstration
of causal connection, where some kind of archaeological or laboratory data
HOSTILP. ENVIRONMENTS             IN   ltADCLlr-FE's     ROMANCE                        83

could demonstrate that evolutionary pressure x produced the difference to
literature y (nomad ism produced the travel narrative, or what have you). In-
stead we are talking about what Jerry Fodor would call post hoc "historical
narratives" that are more or less plausible, more or less convincing. In his po-
lemic "Against Darwinism," Fodor calls this a pragmatic or "rhetorical con-
clusion" where the parameters around an explanation depend upon "what is
being explained and to whom, and to what end. " 7 So at least when it comes to
procedures for assessing the claims of Literary Darwinism, Fodor and Boyd
might agree despite appearing on opposite sides of the adaptation argument:
neither would think Darwinian literary criticism can be tested according to
the strictures of scientific method.
    For the sake of a focused argument, my contention in this chapter is that
the biology-literature connection is least convincing when a favorite target
of such criticism - narrative fiction and especially novels-are read as the
expression of distant evolutionary pressure, and more convincing when read
as proximate human ecologies. But before such focus, some of the more
sprawling claims and issues must be brought to bear as they muddy the water
unavoidably.
    Any approach that initially separates species and environment, or biology
and history, or mind and world, before stitching them back together loses
sight of the phenomenon at hand. Hence a list of red flags with respect to
literary criticism:

   · Pleistocene, Hunter-gatherer {remote from the literary artifact)
   - evolved mind, or evolved mental architecture {question begging)
   · consilience (reductive)
   · modularity (deterministic)
   - neuron (too small )
   · plasticity (bla ck box, too big)

Now let us see in more detail how key examples of such literary criticism tend
to proceed. At the heart of CAL we find Ellen Spolsky's position statement
in her preface to T/1e Work of Fiction (2004) reiterated by Lisa Zunshine in
her Introduction to Cognitive Cultural Studies, which, despite the title, also
focuses on narrative fiction.

   Cognitive literary theory is . .. well positioned to provide insights into a ques-
   tion that has been occluded by the well-deserved successes of the reemergence
   of historical and multifaceted cultural studies that has proliferated after the
   New Criticism in the twentieth century. That question is this: how does the
   evolved architecture that grounds human cognitive processing, especially as it
   manifests itself in the universality of storytelling and the production of visual
                                                                 C HAPTER THREE

    art, interact with the apparently open-ended set of cultural and historical
    contexts in which humans find themselves, so as to produce the variety of
    social constructions that are historically distinctive, yet also often translat-
    able across the boundaries of time and place? It is the job [of cognitive liter-
    ary theory] to begin to chart the emergence, manifestation, and readability
    of these only temporarily stable relationships between the humanly universal
    and the culturally and individually specific, as coded and recorded in cultural
    artifacts. (2)

  Reading quickly one does get the impression of a complex relationship
  amongst brain-being-world, where "cognitive processing" is the brain under-
 stood computationally as information processing, "evolved architecture" is
  the human being understood as a species characterized by storytelling and
  artistic adaptations, and "cultural and historical context" is the world in
  which individuals find themselves, piecing things together in what turns out
  to be the unique cultural artifact such as Ann Radcliffe's Mysteries of Udolpho
  (briefly discussed by Zunshine, 128), or for that matter the Communist Mani -
 festo, or Picasso's "Guernica," or the cave paintings at Altamira. In principle
 no major field of study would be left out, including serious science, social
 studies, and the humanities. Or to put this another way, the skeptic appears
 stymied because cognitive literary studies a la Zunshine denies no academic
 first principles, and we will see how this hasty inclusiveness works in an ex-
 ample below. The physicist, the chemist, the biologist, the historian, the so-
 ciologist, the Marxist, the feminist, the formal critic, and so on, might all be
accommodated as one moves up and down levels of analysis from the micro-
physiologicaJ (e.g., Candace Pert's M olecules of Emotion, which is cited in the
literature, or Alan Richardson's The Neural Sublime: Cognitive Theories a11d
Romantic Texts) to the highest art. "We still need digestion in order to en-
joy Bach," remarks cognitive neuroscientist and authoritative reference point
Antonio Damasio,8 shorthand for integration that excludes nothing except
perhaps for an approach, like Cary Nelson's Cultural Studies, that itself ex-
cludes consideration of"the evolved human brain" (a key term used, we often
forget, by New Left literary critic and Cultural Studies founder , Raymond
Williams).9 Despite protests to the contrary, a project under this description
may appear consilient along the lines of biologist E. 0 . Wilson, or evolu-
tionary psychologist Steven Pinker, whom Zunshine cites as a fellow traveler
through the Introduction to Cognitive Cultural Studies collection (311112).
     ''Consilience," also discussed in the final chapter of my book, would ex-
plain any human phenomenon in natural-scientific terms. Thus, according
to Pinker for instance, a novelistic emotion like romantic love in Jane Aus-
ten's Sense and Sensibility should be read in terms of evolutionary psycho!-
IIOSTILE ENVIRONMENTS          IN   RAD C LIPl' E ' S   ROMANCE               85

 ogy that includes mating and sex differences, parent-offspring conflict, sib-
 ling rivalry, self-deception, taboo, coalitional psychology, and what he calls,
 following Robert Trivers, the " moral emotions," including sympathy, anger,
 gratitude, and guilt, wh ich are supposed to modulate reciprocity in a manner
 compatible with reproductive success. 10 As Brian Boyd, Joseph Carroll, and
 Jonathan Gottschall insist as they introduce their reader Evolution, Literature,
 nnd Film (2010), which includes a chapter by Pinker, evolutionary theory of
 the arts should preva il in the competition amongst theories. Nodding to cir-
 cularity, a Darwin machine picks the winner in a future where only the fittest
 theory survives: " Evolutionary theorists of the arts aim not just to offer one
 more 'school' or 'approach' to fit within the grab bag of current theories, but
to alter the paradigm within which studies in art and culture are conducted.
We have rallied to Edward 0. Wilson's cry for 'consilience' among all the
branches of learning. We envision an integrated body of knowledge extend-
ing from theories of subato mic particles to theories of the arts. Within this
consilient worldview, evolutionary biology is the pivotal discipline uniting
the hard sciences with the human sciences and the arts . ... A true under-
standing of culture must be rooted in the biological characteristics from
which all human cultures grow" (Boyd, Carroll, and Gottschall, 3). Again
problematic is the vast distance be tween the evolutionary-psychological
model and the work of literature itself. Pinker, for one, explicitly distances
analysis from the local culture of its object: "one has to show-independently
of anything we know about the human behavior in question-that X, by its
intrinsic design, is capable of causing a reproduction -enhancing outcome in
an environment like the one in which humans evolved. This analysis can't be
a kind of psychology; it must be a kind of engineering-an attempt to lay
down the design specs of a system that can accomplish a goal (specifically,
a subgoal of reproduction) in a particular world (specifically, the ancestral
environment)" (Pinker, "Towards a Consilient Study of Literature," italics in
the original, 170) .
    For their part Boyd, Carroll, and Gottschall emphasize how reduction to
more fundamental principles can at the same time reveal new diversity and
intricacy, just like reducing heredity to genes and DNA. Granted. But when
heredity is reduced to genes and DNA the effect of ecological factors is deem-
phasized, for instance, and therefore the phenomenon itself-in this case he-
redity-is oriented toward particular understanding that will better explain
something like hemophilia, which is a recessive sex-linked, X chromosome
disorder and therefore more common in males, but will not be able to predict
how plant clones grown at different elevations will respond (the classic study
of Achillea discussed by Richard Lewontin in The Triple Helix: Gene, Organ-
86                                                          C HAPTER THllEE

 ism, a11d E11viro11me11t). Reductions are required in science whether oriented
 toward the gene or toward the environment, and for that matter reduction is
 built into many if not all human projects. But it is disingenuous to imply that
 reduction may not leave anything out; "new diversity and intricacy" will run
 one way under one sort of reduction and another on the reduction that runs
 elsewhere. Decidedly, consilience on the Wilson model runs away from basic
  paradigms and procedures in the humanities.
     So am I accusing Boyd, Carroll, and Gottschall et al. of a category error as
 they explain it in a section on Frequently Asked Questions? Do they mistak-
 enly want to study art in terms of the sciences? Yes and no. Yes, I agree that
 "we can reasonably study both human beings and their cultural products
  using concepts from the human sciences" without making a category error,
 and in fact the arts including literature have been studied with varying de-
 grees of success according to all sorts of scientific paradigms (for one recent
 example, see Franco Moretti's Lit Lab and his book Distant Reading). At the
 same time, no: studying art in terms of the sciences cannot proceed accord-
  ing to the reduction noted above without acknowledging the reduction and
 at what cost; hierarchies of interpretation make a difference as these authors
 readily acknowledge when they respond to a question about "emergent con-
 cepts." Their skeptic asks next: "Doesn't analyzing literature and film require
 us to invoke concepts and methods different from those in biology and the
 human sciences?" Like any other subject area, the authors respond, literature
 has emergent concepts that are "peculiar and appropriate to its own sub-
 ject," like narrative structure, genre, and point of view. But here's the twist:
 "All such categories engage attention, imagination, cognition, and emotion
in ways that can be most deeply explored in terms of an evolved and cul-
turally developed human nature" (8). Continuing my formal critique of the
argument launched above, this fallacy is called the "undistributed middle."
Even ifwe grant (which we shouldn't) that attention, imagination, cognition,
and emotion can be most deeply explored in terms of an evolved and cultur-
ally developed human nature (I think it depends on which aspect of these
capacities we study), that does not mean all categories that engage attention
etc. can be most deeply explored this way. I would suggest, moreover, that
these two argumentative fallacies-undistributed middle, and affirming the
consequent, which I discussed earlier-are not just nitpicking at the margins
of a larger project that may be sound at its core. And this is important: These
two instances illustrate deep-seated fallacious reasoning because the basic
project cannot otherwise bridge the yawning gap between evolution theory
and the literary artifact; fallacies of scale and distance abound precisely where
careful step-by-step reasoning is most needed. Regularly we see arguments
HOSTILI! l!NVIRONMl!NTS         IN   RAD C LIFF l! 'S   /lOMANCE

  that launch with a categorical premise that cannot be denied: we should all
 (even humanists) respect the scientific method and the most current research
 data; Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection along with the dis-
 covery of particulate gene inheritance (the "Modern Synthesis") is basically
  right; humans have evolved like all other forms of life; the mind and other
 basic features of humanity have evolved likewise. Premises granted. But then
 Literary Darwinists need to plausibly link these granted premises to interest-
 ing (i.e., non -vacuous) conclusions, and here's where things get dicey. I may
 in fact grant all of the premises listed above, I might in fact be "pro-science,"
without having to conclude that topic X in the arts/literature is most deeply
 explored in terms of an evolved and culturally developed human nature. Far
 from it. And that is why fallacies of scale and distance abound, because these
critics must regularly move from undeniable science-oriented general prem-
 ises to close reading of a text while appearing to uphold reasonable standards
of argumentation - hence the form of a sound argument without the sound-
ness. The broad outline of this (misleading) arc is typically repeated at the
level of book organization. Prototypical is the Evolution, Literature & Film
reader that starts with Darwin, Dawkins, and E. 0 . Wilson et al. on the theory
of evolution, moves to the basic "Riddle of Art" as a human endeavor, and
concludes with interpretations of particular works and topics like "Jealousy
in Othello," "Slash Fiction and Human Mating Psychology," or "Paleolithic
Politics in British Novels of the Longer Nineteenth Century." I should say,
by the way, that the movement amongst these first couple of steps is plau-
sible and perfectly interesting; aU sorts of worthwhile questions and research
projects can and have been built around counterfactuaJ thinking, joint atten-
tion, communication, and other basic human capacities shared to a greater
and lesser extent with other creatures, which is precisely where scientifically
driven research questions appear most appropriate: I think for instance of
Michael Tomasello's work across primate and infant cognition. Leaping from
this basic order of human capacities to theories of "social change" or to liter-
ary criticism, however, fails both on logical grounds and on phenomenologi-
cal grounds because the analysis must proceed with frameworks and catego-
ries inappropriate to the phenomena studied.
     In his critical response to Literary Darwinism, Kramnick reminds us a
"rapprochement with science" need not be brokered by evolutionary psy-
chology and I would add that any artificial monopoly on the means of inter-
pretation harms ( CI 433). We need genetics and ecology, and we need literary
criticis.m and scientific psychology, but certainly not on the model of consil-
ience; some alternatives I will explore below and in my epilogue coauthored
with ecological net1roscientist Stephanie Preston.
88                                                             C J-1 A P T E R   T H R E E


      Ostensibly both the new ep and CAL projects would be additive and not
 subtractive. In the piece, "On the Origin of Comics" repurposed for the Criti-
  cal Inquiry polemic, Boyd explains how "evolution offers a unified and natu·
  ralistic causal system from the general to the very particular. Far from reduc-
  ing all to biology and then to chemistry and physics, it easily and eagerly
  plugs in more local factors-in a case like comics, historical, technological,
  social, artistic and individual factors, for instance- the closer we get to par-
  ticulars. Evolution accepts multilevel explanations, from cells to societies,
  and the last full room for nature a,1d culture, society a11d individuals" ( Criti-
  cal Inquiry 395). Likewise Zunshine, again quoting Spolsky, suggests "the ad-
  dition of biological, evolutionary, and cognitive hypotheses to the discussion
  of [cultural] change ... offers literary historical and cultural studies a way
  to consider the universals of human cognitive processing as they function
  in their several contexts." 11 Departing from Boyd, however, Zunshine would
  strike an important note of caution when it comes to how these several con-
  texts add up: "In counting human cognitive architecture as a crucial factor
  contributing to cultural change, cognitive literary critics subscribe cautiously
 to a view of this architecture as flexible-cautiously, because although the
 architecture itself does not change (having remained constant across the spe-
 cies for at least the last 10,000 years), the ways in which it expresses itself in
 specific environments certainly do" (62). And on this note we are directed to
 the controversial work of evolutionary psychologists John Tooby and Leda
Cosmides (Center for Evolutionary Psychology), who were teachers of Lisa
Zunshine when she was an English graduate student at the University of Cali-
fornia, Santa Barbara, and who are fellow travelers with Pinker, Trivers, and
Buss in the "narrow" or "orthodox" school of EP. In the end, a consilient
project of this sort will not be additive in some neutral sense where each of
the disciplinary variables carries equal weight, or where critical theory, for in-
stance, might sometimes prevail. "Universals of human cognitive processing"
remain constant and will therefore range over the entire series of variables,
whereas particular "expressions" will not.
     The result of this initial weighting is that the interpretations of any given
expression gravitate back toward universals which are, themselves, hardly the
object of consensus beyond the highest level of generality like the capacity
for language, and especially for Zunshine, Theory of Mind, hereafter ToM
(16). From this CAL perspective, no longer is it acceptable to claim some
interpretive domain safe from science, and more importantly, no linkage
is considered too distant for analytic purposes. The latest sciences of brain
physiology, molecular biology, cognitive psychology, and evolutionary psy-
chology should all have a place because their objects of study (e.g., neurons,
HOSTILE l!NVIRONMENTS          IN   RAD C LIFl'E'S   ROMANCE

  hormones, language capacity, principles of sexual selection) are each neces-
 sary conditions for what appears on the page. No doubt this is true in some
 trivial sense. But begged are questions of phenomenology: What level of ex-
 planation is most appropriate to the phenomenon at issue? J. J. Gibson, an-
 other kind of scientific psychologist, puts it this way as he anticipates what
 is for Jerry Fodor a cynical rhetoric: "The unit you choose for describing
 the environment depends on the level of the environment you choose to de-
 scribe."12 The next argument of this chapter is that Gibson helps us find de-
 scriptive units appropriate to human environments not just as they appear in
 our prehistory, but also as they appear in our literature.
     Looking ahead toward m y Gibsonian reading of Radcliffe, we can sharpen
 the point by witnessing how Zunshine treats descriptions of nature that
 might seem far removed from her cognitive universals, and especially ToM.
 In Why We Read Fiction: Theory of Mind and the Novel (2006), Zunshine re-
counts a talk on ToM and literature when she was asked about those parts of
fictional narratives, like descriptions of nature, that ostensibly have nothing
 to do with "reporting or guessing character's minds" (25). Zunshine tells us
 that descriptions of nature are quite scarce, so she looked "in vain" as she re-
 turned to Turgenev where, she admits confusingly, nature passages bored her
so desperately in her adolescence (she "finally learned to skip all of them"). 13
     How does a grown-up Lisa Zunshine train herself not to skip nature pas-
sages as she develops into a professor of English literature? Tacking toward
humor she "vitiates" her taste with Wordsworth's Prelude at the same time
she learns to read nature descriptions as pathetic fallacy and personification.
Witness how she summarizes this process into One Big Fiction for the sake
of her prehistoric cognitive architecture: "If we conceive of the fictional nar-
rative as a cognitive artifact in progress-an ongoing thousand-year-long
experimentation with our cognitive adaptations-we can say that this narra-
tive constantly diversifies the ways in which it engages our Theory of Mind"
(26-27). Descriptions of nature turn out not to be, in fact, descriptions of
nature at all. Or at least they cannot be readily enjoyed as such because ir-
relevant to ToM. Instead they are mental prompts: "Imagined landscapes,
with their pathetic fallacies, personifications, and anthropomorphizing, and
with their tacit illuminations of human minds perceiving those landscapes,
prompt us to exercise our ToM in a way very different from the stories that
contain no such landscapes" (27). While trying to avoid the pathetic fallacy,
Zunshine's approach commits a mentalistic fallacy shared by some others
in the critical movement CAL. This fallacy reduces anything cognizable-
which includes everything written down in a novel-to "mental architecture
as defined in cognitive science" where we find four levels according to Patrick
90                                                              C IIAP Tll R THR EE

 Colm Hogan: intention, representation, connectionism, and neurobiology
 (Imrod11ctio11 to Cognitive C11/t11ral Studies, 237- 239 ).
      Yes, nature description in a novel m ay say something interesting abo ut
  mental architecture in this technical sense, and the early CAL author Elaine
  Scarry demonstrates how so. 14 First Scarry makes good use of J. J. Gibson
  on kinetic occlusion and perceptual acuity that gives us a world - whether
  found or built-reliable in its vivacity, persistence, and continuity. In the
  first chapter she shows how, for instance, an author can coax a su rface into
  solidity by passing something transparent over it, using Proust's description
  of a magic-lantern image playing across the walls at Combray (11 ). Because
  the verbal depictions of narrative (as opposed to daydrea ms o r paintings)
  are almost totally devoid of actual sensory content beyond crosshatches on
  the page (5), Scarry argues, they im itate percept ual cognition instead of ac-
  tivating perceptual cognition like music, or even a poem where the visual
  disposition is a prelude to sound (7). 15 " Literature consists of a steady stream
  of erased imperatives" (35) that dispose us toward a world. By way of demon-
  stration, Scarry reads into the opening of Tess of the d'Urbervilles an intr icate
 array of small instructions that include: " [Look closely at the walker's legs. ] The
 pair of legs [ now picture their work of weight-bearing) that carried him [assess
 how well they hold that weight] were rickety, [a n d how that affects h is mo-
 tion] and there was a bias in his gait [ watch w hich way the load leans] which
 inclined him .. . " (37, emphasis original). Referencing Gibso n, Scarry says
 what we notice in narrative, like what we notice otherwise, is in some ways
 more about the reliable givenness of what we don't notice. T he ambulatory
and gravitational givenness of this walker in a world of walkers di ffe rs from
the givenness of creatures who share this world in some ways but not others.
Gibson might point out that a young walker walks differently, a tiny creature
is subject to gravity differently, and so on. Just as narrative gives us an angle
(ambling wherefore) on a shared world that is largely fam iliar (a world where
legs walk), perceptual cognition gives us an angle on a shared world that is
largely familiar. Hence for Scarry, narrative imitates perceptual cognition.
For Scarry in the spirit of Gibson, narrative is thus a distinctly useful experi-
ment in cognitive psychology as a human endeavor, and at this point I will
return to environmental psychology in its most obvious example. For next,
Scarry focuses on the flower including Ashbury's delphinium and Rous-
seau's umbellifer, imaginable for its size that lets it sit in front of our faces
and migrate comfortably into our heads, its cup-like shape that breaks over
the curve of our eyes, its localization confirmed in the experimental literature
of cognitive psychology that explains how smaller images are more "filled
in" because they demand less mental energy (53). Pace Zunshine, there is no
H0 S TI LI! EN V IRO NM E NT S   I N   RAD C LI F F l! S   R OM ANCE           91

 literary problem with nature-out-there boring us until we figure out how it
  is relevant to T heory of M ind. For Scarry, " nature" like a flower is already
 part of o ur mental arch itecture, and then via criticism, narrative can help us
 understand how so.
       Cognitive Approaches to Literature have been brewing for a few decades,
 includin g th is rich but relatively unassimilated work by Scarry, along with
 "cognitive rhetorics" emerging fro m the 1980 George Lakoff and Mark John-
 son publication, Metaphors We Live By. One quality that unifies these earlier
 works is embodied cognition a la G ibson, where embodiment is not just a
 matter of the living organism defin ed by its outer membrane, but is rather
 a matter of envi ronment. For Scarry, we have seen how perceptual cogni-
 tion involves ambling in a certain way from Shaston to the village of Marlatt.
 For Lakoff, who agrees with Gibson on embodiment but not environmental
 realism, we are told how categories like anger are inherently "cognitive" in-
 sofa r as a category is a mental entity, at the same time that it is a culturally
 defin ed experience. Hence for Lakoff, afforda nces of a human environment
 cannot be invariant as Gibson describes them, as he focuses on certain kinds
of physical activity: invariably natu re affords locomotion accord ing to Gib-
son.16 Instead Lakoff m ight po int out how a remark is inflammatory at a level
of detail that varies acco rding to local laws and injurable people; emotional
affordances of the h uman envi ronment are not invariant. So in contrast
to Zunshine and recent critics fo llowing brain-focused science-Hogan's
"mental architecture" -we fi nd a few important distinctions. First, in Scarry
and Lakoff one wouldn't even encounter " nature descript ions" unless care-
fully defined by way of genre (fo r instance the ''nature guide"), because the
very topic relies upon m isguided commonsense about brain-world division
that produces Zunshine's anthropomo rphisms and projections at the same
time that it obfuscates basic cognitive phenomena like flowers and anger.
Second, following Gibson, "environments" for Scarry and Lakoff appear on
a spectrum rang ing from more or less built to more or less found, and they
are shared variously with other conspecifics and potentially, I would add in
the spirit of Gibson, with other creatures. Third, in Scarry and Lakoff one
sees the investment in scientific inquiry without the red flags of evolutionary
psychology. Evolutionary psychology would have nothing interesting to say
about Scarry's ambling or Lakoff's inflammatory remark, although both ap-
pear under the sign of cognitive science not antiscience.
      It should come as no surprise that Zunshine's approach is more contro-
versial than her ecumenism suggests; the interpretation of literature (or any-
thing else for that matter) starts somewhere for some reason and proceeds
across fields already populated with people who care one way or another,
92                                                         C HAPT ER Tl-lllEE

with invitations and recalcitrance, with paths of greater and lesser resistance
up to a vanishing point where opportunities eventually run out. But this is
not to say biological science is in principle and completely incommensurable
with literary criticism. From the perspective of literary criticism it matters
which biological science we are talking about, and in J. J. Gibson's affordance
theory we find a point of collaboration where human environments, includ-
ing nature descriptions, are at issue. The next section explains what is sug-
gestive and limiting in Gibson's affordance and related theory, focusing on
the example of a "hostile environment," which we'll encounter in the Gothic
novel.


                  Gibson's Affordances and the Humanities

  Roughly where does affordance theory appear at the intersection of science
  and the humanities? \\Then the philosopher of science Andrea Scarantino
  gives us a definition wherein "the affordances of the environment ... are
  the offerings of the environment, roughly the sets of threats (negative affor-
  dances) and promises (positive affordances) that characterize items in the
  environment relative to organisms," 17 we in the humanities tend to think
  first about how threats and promises appear in certain kinds of rhetorical
 situations, and then, following Scarantino, we might turn towa rd orga nisms
 that include but are not limited to people. Below I will analyze some signifi-
 cant relationships amongst three types of environment where people appear,
 including 1) an environment that is dangerous for the human-as-organism;
2) an environment that is hostile for people defined according to legally pro-
tected classes; and 3) an environment that is hostile in the sense that includes
a literary character like Antonia, or La Motte from The Romance of the Forest.
But first let us recall what threats and promises have meant in the humani-
ties, starting with Aristotle's Rhetoric, which analyzes political speech along
just these lines. A methodological claim of this section is that the ancient
discipline rhetoric is built into affordance theory from the start because that
is how threats and promises appear for people.
     Here is Aristotle's example. After capturing the island of Samos, Athe-
nians debated sending settlers there in violation of the intent of the Second
Athenian League of 377/376. Cydias asks those engaged in a debate about
alJotment of land to "imagine [all) the Greeks standing around them in a
circle, actually seeing and not only later hearing about what they might vote"
( 1384632-35). In this case, the rhetorician invokes the figure of a tribunal of
conscience in order to evoke shame among those whose reputation is poten-
tially threatened-and this to help the assembly reach a decision compatible
HOSTILE ENVIIIONMENTS           IN   RADCLll'FE's    ROMANCE                   93
  with the League's agreement. For Aristotle's rhetorician, threats and prom-
  ises are speech acts that take narrative form . Moreover in telling this story
 about a tribunal of conscience, Cydias virtually threatens the debaters: it is
 a speech act that does something as it is said. Or we can put this in terms
 of affordance theory: the rhetorician "characterizes" as threat-a negative
 affordance - items in the environment relative to Greek citizens, where the
 "relevant items" are community beliefs appearing virtually ("imagine the
 Greeks seeing .. ."), and the "threat" is a story about damaged reputation.
 Following rhetoric, then, literary studies appear on the horizon where stories
 find their home.
      But before we turn to literary studies per se let us finish with the pioneer
 field in the humanities: rhetoricians have long been experts in affordance
 theory as it pertains to politics and other classical speech situations. Follow-
 ing a famous 1968 article by Lloyd Bitzer, the "rhetorical situation" includes
 an exigence (in terms of my project a basic discomfort 18) like Congress of
 Racial Equality advocate Jack Weinberg thrown into a police car on the UC
 Berkeley campus October 1, 1964, an audience like the agitated students who
were inspired to action a couple months later by Mario Savio's "put your bod-
ies upon the gears" speech, and a set of constraints that are part of the situa-
tion because they have the power to constrain decisions and actions needed
to modify the exigence: Bitzer lists beliefs, attitudes, documents, facts, tradi-
tions, images, interests, motives, and the like (8).1 9 Rhetoric, as a humanistic
form of affordance theory, posits a situation that is not neutral but is rather
"persuasive," threatening and promising with respect to our human being-
in-the-world. More precisely rhetorical theory provides a set of awarenesses
specially appropriate to human environments: traditionally next to delibera-
tive rhetoric where the goal is audience activation, we find forensic rhetoric
where the goal is ultimately judgment, and epideictic rhetoric (ceremonial
praise or blame) where the goal is affecting attitudes. Rhetoric also goes into
great detail about how the general vectors of threat and promise can be struc-
tured for maximum effect: arrange thus and so, deliver not like this but like
that. Let us say rhetorical theory provides an historically rich field guide to
the threatening and promising environments that are especially human. In
turn affordance theory per se attunes us to environmental factors beyond
the control of a "good man speaking well," as Cicero famously put it, vir
bonus dicendi peritus, and in doing so it provides a bridge from exclusively
human situations to environments that include the extrahuman. How should
we understand the rhetoric of Gibson's affordance theory, where the human
organism shades into human being? Tracking intellectual history and key-
words, we find Gibson suggestive on this point before he falters on a positivist
-   94                                                                     C HAPT E R Tl·I R!iE

    understanding oflanguage and residual behaviorism that was prevalent mid-
    century, as I'll explain.
        Providing his own intellectual history, Gibson reminds us how, for Ge-
    stalt psychologists, we are hailed by things around us:
         The value is clear 011 tire fac,: of it, as we say, and thus it has a p/1ysiog110111ic
         quality in the way that the emotions of a man appear 011 liis f ace. To quote
         from Principles of Gestalt Psychology (Kaffka, 1935), "Each thing says what it
         is ... A fruit says 'Eat me'; water says 'Drink me'; thunder says ' Fear me'; and
         woman says 'Love me"' (p. 7). These values are vivid and essential features of
         the experience itself. Koffka did not believe that a meaning of this sort could
         be explained as a pale context of memory images or an unconscio us set of
         response tendencies. The postbox "invites" the mailing of a letter, the handle
         "wants to be grasped," and things "tell us what to do with them" (p. 353). Kml
         Lewin coined the term Aulfordenmgscliarakter, which has been tra nslated as
         imitation character (by J. F. Brown in 1929) and as valence (by D. K. Adams in
         1931 ... ) . The latter term came into general use. Valences for Lewin had corre-
         sponding vectors, which could be represented as arrows pushing the observer
         toward or away from the object (138).

    Then Gibson explains how the concept of affordance is derived from this
    background in Gestalt psychology, with a crucial difference: "the affordance
    of something does not change as the need of the observer changes. The ob-
    server may or may not perceive or attend to the affordance, according to his
    needs, but the affordance, being invariant, is always there to be perceived"
    (138-139) .
         Very good: Gibson decenters first-person experience as the primary crite-
     rion for identifying an environmental affordance. But as we saw in Lakoff's
     objection, and as we discover with respect to human beings, affordances do
     vary substantially according to situations defined rhetorically, which is not
     the same thing as experience- or need-orientation. For example, the cop car
     roof affords Mario Savio, like most adult humans, a stage for speaking- it
     is climb-up-able-and in this regard it is invariant as Gibson would have it.
     However, the action-event is not defined by mere climbing or speaking-to.
     Rather it is defined by speaking consequentially, which does not depend
     upon Savio's personal experience, nor does it reference centrally his needs.
    Instead the event is defined rhetorically, referencing in narrative form at least
    the exigence, audience, and constraints like the relevant legal and administra-
    tive apparatus, but then also the stuff including a cop car roof that makes this
    scene not only possible physically but also consequential and persuasive with
    respect to future activities. Remember it is precisely this surprising stage and
    its repurposing that gives us the affordance in the first place; it is variable
 H O S T I I. I! I! N V I R O N M E N T S   IN   R A D C L I F F I! ' S   /I O M A N C E   95
  (i.e., not invariant) according to criteria that appear most vividly in narrative
  form, and the relevant patterns reside substantially in an environment we
  call cultural2° or social, 2 1 depending upon the analytic frame where the first
  emphasizes communication structures like myths and rituals, and the second
  emphasizes organizational structures like social stratification. No, a cop car
  roof is not "always there to be perceived" as a stage for speaking persuasively,
 and in this regard it is variant. But to the degree that event is now fixed in the
 historical record, if you will, the cop car roof is always there to be perceived as
 a stage for speaking persuasively and in this regard it is invariant. Like an open
 mic at a coffee house, or the podium in the US Senate, cop car roofs in certain
 circumstances suggest themselves as a speaking opportunity thanks, in part,
 to this historical even t with its afterlives in our political and media culture.
 In certai n circumstances cop car roofs now say plead on me or harangue on
 me. And you can multiply examples for all sorts of things in the world hailing
 loudly from some place in the more recent social or cultural world distinct
 from the world we share with our earliest ancestors. Hence the central ques-
 tion for the theory of affordances is not "whether information is available in
 ambient light for perceiving them," as Gibson suggests (140), but something
 closer to the Gestalt psychologists Gibson would supersede, namely how the
 human environment is structured so as to reveal any particular affordance.
      In fact, Kurt Lewin's A Dynamic Theory of Personality (1935) starts with
a biological environment before moving to an environment that has some
distinctly social characteristics. Lewin references the ethologists Jakob von
Uexkiill on the biological environment characterized as a complex of foods,
enemies, means of protection, etc., that offers an organism some set of func-
tional possibilities (77). But focusing on "Environmental Forces in Child
Behavior and Development" (70), Lewin turns to agreeable or disagreeable
experiences and the special structure of the child's situation. 22 So valences are
defined: "Many things attract the child to eating, others to climbing, to grasp-
ing, to manipulation, to sucking, to raging at them, etc. These imperative en-
vironmental facts - we shall call them valences [Aujfordenmgscharakter)-
determine the direction of the behavior. Particularly from the standpoint of
dynamics, the valences, their kind (sign), strength, and distribution, must
be regarded as among the most important properties of the environment"
(73). Interesting discussions ensue regarding the fields of force, Umweltkrafte
(83), the transformation of the total field, Umstrukt11rier1111g (84), and em-
barrassment followed by withdrawal, A11s-dem-Felde-Gehen (90). And it is
worth mentioning that Gestalt psychologists like Lewin were not alone in the
1930s analyzing human situations in terms other than positivist or behavior-
ist: Erik Rietveld has recently written about Wittgenstein, for instance, for
                                                                C HAPTlllt THRllll

 whom an expert allows himself to be moved by the situation. 23 According
  to this Gibsonian reading of Wittgenstein, the process of being responsive
  to affordances is inseparable from the craftsman's concerns, because he per-
  ceives a relevant solicitation to act: an affordance that matters to him and is
  e:\.-perienced as attractive or repulsive (997). And keeping in mind our first
  topic, we should note the special affective dimension of this process accord-
  ing to Wittgenstein as everyday aesthetic gestures take shape in the context of
  discontent, disgust, and "discomfort" (Lectures 011 Aesthetics, 1938).
       Most important for our project on well-being and its discontents is
  Lewin's "hopeless situation" (Lewin, 94) . He defines it this way: " If a situation
  becomes hopeless, that is, if it becomes as a whole inescapably disagreeable,
  the child, despairing, contracts, physically and psychically, under the vectors
  coming from all sides and usually attempts to build a wall between himself
  and the situation. This is expressed both in the typical bodily gesture of de-
  spair (crumpling up, covering the eyes with the arms, etc .... ) and by a sort
  of encysting of the self: the child becomes obdurate" (94). No doubt Lewin
  explains how a "state of tension" arises from the physical facts of the envi-
  ronment and the limitations of the child's own abilities: the pencil does not
  go over the paper as it should. But "still more important are social factors,"
  Lewin insists, especially the authority or power of adults and of other chil-
 dren (97). For his part, Gibson recognizes that "the richest and most elabo-
 rate affordances of the environment are provided by other animals and, for
 us, other people ... : When touched they touch back, when struck they strike
 back; in short, they interact with the observer and with one another. Behavior
 affords behavior, and the whole subject matter of psychology and the social
 sciences can be thought of as an elaboration of this basic fact." Convenient
 for our purposes he gives the example of political behavior: "all depend on
 the perceiving of what another person or other persons afford, or sometimes
on the misperceiving ofit" (135).
      Very well. But quickly Gibson retreats back to his basic question at a
distance: whether information is available in ambient light, how these "de-
tached objects with topologically closed surfaces" [i.e., other persons] pro-
vide stimulus information including speech, pictures, and writing, which are
treated as second-order phenomena as I'll discuss below. How something like
politics affords, how exactly invitations and threats are characterized in the
social field, remains underdeveloped in Gibson despite his debt to Lewin,
who showed great sensitivity to the social field and its capacity to make and
unmake people.24 Ultimately the political situation of Aristotle's Athenians
cannot appear as such, and cannot be analyzed adequately, on the level of di-
 HOST(Lll IJNVIRONMIJNTS        IN   RI\D C LIFPE'S   ROMAN C E                97
  rect perception as Gibson understands it: the situation is constituted by way
  of political rhetoric poorly understood as speech-information. Nor can the
  wholly inescapable and disagreeable - Lewin would say hopeless-situation
  of rape victim Antonia ( The Monk) appear as such, nor can it be analyzed ad-
 equately, on the level of such direct perception. This situation is constituted
 by way of literary rhetoric poorly understood as speech information, though
 at the same time it is real enough.
      Gibson's theory was adamantly prelinguistic and pre-cultural; like many
 (but not all) scientific psychologists, he suffered from paleophilia, which
 marginalized any human activity that isn' t shared with our earliest human
 ancestors. Gibson would blanch at a theory of affordances that included Aris-
 totle's rhetoric defined as " the art of seeing the available means of persuasion
 in each case," because th is definition is at one remove from direct perception,
 where the means of persuasion typically cannot be seen. Barbed wire is per-
 suasive directly, but rhetoric takes off at just the point where barbed wire and
 other immediate threats leave off, giving way to means of persuasion that are
 readily discernible but not immediate. So we in the humanities must depart
 from Gibson at th e same time that we honor his principle that the unit you
 choose for describing the environment depends on the level of the environ-
 ment you choose to describe. If we wish to describe the level of the human
 environment that can give us "a lawsuit waiting to happen" or where work-
 place hostility potentially resides, then the descriptive unit we choose will
derive from a theory of rhetoric that allows for the force of law. At the same
 time we honor Gibsonian monism that warns against the mistake where we
"separate the natural from the artificial as if there were two environments . . .
as if there were a world of mental products distinct from the world of material
products" (130 ). At what point did Gibson violate his own monistic principles
setting aside supposedly artificial environments like the wishful musings of a
personal injury lawyer, or the hostile environment in a Gothic novel?
     The core of my Gibson critique aims at his impoverished theory of lan-
guage and communication, rooted in the mid-twentieth century positivist
focus on language as propositional thought, and despite his protests to the
contrary (242), the mathematical theory of communication as it was famously
composed in 1949 by Shannon and Weaver (see Fig. 3.1.): Words for Gibson
provide the experience of things only at secondhand (63). The purpose of
words, according to Gibson, is to allow for the accumulation of descriptive
information about the environment that can be stored and then passed down
to future generations. In other words, "language" for Gibson is not a factor
in direct perception; it is, like pictures, a matter of indirect perception and
98                                                                   C HAP T ER   THREE


     Information
        Source        Transmitter                             Receiver     Destination




               Message
                                      Signal       Received
                                                    Signal
                                                                         ;□
                                                                     Message




                                               Noise
                                               Source
FIG u RE   3. 1 . Shannon Communication System.



 hence falls outside his core theory (10, 42) where it forms what he calls "a dif-
 ferent kind of knowledge" (253). In this way mind / body, ideal/material dual-
 ism returns to Gibson through the back door. However, a practical example
 helps us rebuild upon Gibson's monistic principles.
     Legally considered, a workplace-which is to say a niche defined as a set
 of affordances (128)-cannot be hostile just because it poses inherent threats
 that are species-relevant; that would not be a hostile work environment but
 rather a dangerous work environment like a coal mine. Instead a hostile work
 environment is defined legally with reference to subspecies "characteristics,"
 as they are called in the UK, which are culturally specific: race, age over 40,
 ability, religion, and so on. Moreover, the "environmental" quality of the
 hostile work environment is crucial. Actionables are not just hostile behav-
 iors like physical assault or offending words that might be criminal and result
 in a civil lawsuit directed at the offending person, but also, crucially, non-
 behaviors or inactions on the part of an employer. So for example, AT&T had
a perfectly good diversity and inclusion policy that might have protected a
Kansas City employee and convert to Islam; AT&T did not enforce the policy,
and the woman won a hostile work environment harassment case and was
awarded $5 million in punitive damages. 25 If AT&T management could have
known about the harassment, or failed to take immediate action to stop the
harassment, the company could be liable. Unlike nonhuman environments,
human environments like the workplace are constituted in part by counter-
factuals (e.g., could have known, should have known) that find their grip
beyond the handles of immediate perception simply understood.
    In a helpful 2003 Philosophy of Science article titled "Affordances Ex-
plained," Andrea Scarantino indicates differently why Gibson's affordance
 l·IOSTJL E ENVIRONMENTS           IN   RAD C LIFFE'S      ROMAN C E                       99
theory must be revised to account for a range of human environments be-
yond that which is immediately sensible.

   There is no reason to assume that a theory of perception can explain in the
   same way how humans perceive, if they do, a number being divide-by-two-
   nblc (n mental nffo rdancc), a flyin g ball being catch-able (a basic physical affor-
   dnnce), and a flying ball being score- with-able (n nonbasic physical affordance).
   Whereas catch -ability seems suitable for bein g grasped in a similar way by
   language-using and non -language-using creatures, divide-by-two-ability and
   score-with-nbiliry demand a story about perception in which the language-
   mediated ability to master concepts such as divisible number or point in a game
   will play a prominen t role. This is just to say that affordance properties ought
   not be treated by default as a homogenous block by theories of perception.
   They inherit from their constitutive relations with kinds of doings and kinds of
   hnppe11i11gs a number of distinguishing properties that are potentially relevant
   to establish whether they are perceivable, and, if they are, how they are per-
   ceived. (960 - 961, emphasis original)

 Scarantino is right that a theory of affordances must go beyond basic physi-
 cal affordances if it is to include humans. However, his reference to our
 "language-mediated ability to master concepts" gets us only partway into the
 hostile environment; it helps us understand how in this case a legal appara-
 tus enables direct perception ( of harassing behaviors, for instance). But what
should we call the negative affordance we saw in Aristotle's example above,
where the threatening environment takes shape precisely as shame posited,
the "threat" a story about damaged reputation? A basic physical affordance?
A nonbasic physical affordance? A mental affordance? None of these cap-
ture the phenomenon adequately. To be precise, this negative affordance does
not reference our " language-mediated ability to master concepts" as much
as it references the rhetorical situation as defined by Bitzer et al.; and the
affordance is not mental or physical, but rather rhetorical as it enacts- or
better transacts-a set of relationships that are irreducible to mental enti-
ties or physical facts. We might say, referencing Scarantino's terminology,
Aristotle's rhetoric provides a "story about perception" without which this
situation could not appear as such. Rhetoric, now a subset of language writ
large, provides the kinds of doings and the kinds of happenings that make
an affordance property like "tribunal of conscience" appear in this situation.
    In turn, what could evolutionary psychology say about hostile work en-
vironments? Perhaps it could say something general about how people are
apparently evolved "to live in groups and to build the cultures they need to
survive in a hostile world," 26 or something about how competition breeds
hostility by eroding epistemic conditions like trust and transparency, 27 or
100                                                           C HAPTER THREE

how the ingroup-outgroup dynamic shows up all over the social map in-
cluding in the workplace where the dynamic takes particular historical and
cultural form.~ 8 In other words, evolutionary psychology can say something
about hostile environments safety-netted by history and culture, but it can-
not say much of interest about the hostile work environment per se, let alone
a hostile em'ironment a la Radcliffe, and it certainly could not tell us anything
 about "actionable" events or circumstances that lie at the very heart of the
 workplace phenomenon after all.
     Evocritics have also recently tried to explain what we find inviting and
 foreboding in representations of the natural world, so we should pay some
 special attention as we move toward hostile environments in The Romance of
 the Forest. In fact, Stephen Pinker references Gibson in How the Mind Works
 (264) before he moves to aesthetic theory where Gibson wouldn't follow,
 both because Pinker's analysis depends heavily upon mental representation,
 and because Pinker slips from the ecology of perception to evolutionary psy-
 chology where attractions and repulsion are explained in terms quite alien to
 Gibson. First Pinker on representation: "People explore a new landscape and
 draw up a mental resource map, rich in details about water, plants, animals,
 routes, and shelter. . . . We innately find savannas beautiful, but we also like a
 landscape that is easy to explore and remember ... " (376 ). Then Pinker tran-
 sitions to evolutionary psychology, exploiting an association fallacy and some
 nice rhyming at the end of a list." ... Geometry of beauty is the visible signal
 of adaptively valuable objects: safe, food-rich, explorable, learnable habitats,
 and fertile, healthy dates, mates, and babies" (526) . More recently we have
 Denis Dutton's The Art Instinct on "Landscape and Longing" (Oxford Uni-
 versity Press, 2009). Like Pinker, Dutton references the famous Orians and
 Heerwagen study on the savanna as optimal from an early-human survival
 perspective, and hence beautiful from our aesthetic perspective, 29 also John
 Tooby and Leda Cosmides on emotion connected to landscape preference
 (Dutton, 25). "In the Pleistocene, habitat choice was another factor determi-
 native of life and death, and emotional indifference to landscapes is as evo-
lutionarily unlikely as indifference toward snakes, dangerous precipices, and
poisonous foods, on the one hand, or sex, babies and sweet and fatty foods, on
the other" (26). One example shows how such work is far from Gibson even
when Dutton qualifies that the history oflandscape painting is about much
more than potential Pleistocene habitats (27). When Dutton conjectures that
"a climbable tree was a device to escape predators in the Pleistocene, and this
life-and-death fact is revealed today in our aesthetic sense for trees (a nd in
chiJdren's spontaneous love for climbing them)" (20), he jumps in typical,
HOSTILE E NVI RONM E NT S       IN   RAD C LIPP!!'S   ROMAN CE                 IOI


 daredevil fashion from earl y-human affordance theory to aesthetic theory in
 our time, and now aesthetic artifacts are appreciated (or not) because they
 address our species-relevant promises and threats. "Post-Pleistocene signs of
 settlement or agriculture have become cliches in calendar or greeting-card art
 perhaps because they seem to humanize a landscape, rendering it less threat-
 ening" (20 ). Or back to Pinker on fiction as one art form that functions just
 like the others as it exercises our species-defining preferences: "When the
 illusion works, there is no mystery to the question 'Why do people enjoy fic-
 tion?' It is identical to the question ' Why do people enjoy life?' When we are
 absorbed in a book or a movie, we get to see breathtaking landscapes, hobnob
 with important people, fa ll in love with ravishing men and women, protect
 loved ones, attain impossible goals, and defeat wicked enemies" (539).
     Once again my critique of evocriticism as remote suggests itself at the
same time a question is begged. I too should say something substantial
about hostile environments in the native sense where "hostile" refers to life-
threatening enem ies and "environment" refers to what we share, roughly,
with our prehistoric ancestors. After all, these hostilities are real enough. As
we move away from Zunshine's nature description as mere projection, this
question becom es important because The Romance of the Forest is largely
about such primo rdial threats. I can also frame this issue in terms of a cross-
disciplinary imperative. There is no reason we shouldn't be interested in all
three of the following: 1) environments dangerous to certain kinds of crea-
tures including us; 2) environments that are hostile to second-class citizens;
and 3) environments that are hostile to certain kinds of people defined in
rhetorical terms -remember Aristotle's threats and promises that could take
shape only with storytelling that references but exceeds the Athenian League's
formal agreement. However, these three levels of analysis tend to be distrib-
uted to three different disciplinary fields-science, social science, and the
humanities respectively-without paying attention to ways in which these
three must be interanimate. We do, in fact, have a special discipline beyond
rhetoric devoted to storytelling per se, where this third environment gets its
due at the same time that it renders social environments and natural environ-
ments legible. That discipline is literary studies, where we find David Herman
who, invoking Gibson's early contemporary Jakob von Uexkiill, cannily calls
certain kinds of novelists" Umwelt researchers." 30 My argument in the next
section is that Umwelt researcher Ann Radcliffe composes hostility where it
resides at the outskirts o f personhood. Or to put this another way, Radcliffe's
fiction optimizes the study of hostility because it tells the story with the right
social and organic facts.
 102                                                                      C H A I' T E R T II R E E


                                The Romance of the Forest

  It is not "The Romance IN the Forest" but rather "The Romance OF the For-
  est" that gives us a passionate environment- an environment that will also
  appear terrible and sublime if genre expectations are realized, even hostile
  (from the Latin hostis or enemy). Next you might think about how, on the
  back cover of the Oxford edition, 31 "environment" gives way to a passionate
  "setting": "Set in a Roman Catholic Europe of violent passions and extreme
  oppression, the novel follows the fate of its heroine Adeline, who is mysteri-
  ously placed under the protection of a family fleeing Paris for debt. They take
  refuge in a ruined abbey in south-eastern France, where sinister relics of the
  past-a skeleton, a manuscript, and a rusty dagger - are discovered in con-
  cealed rooms." (See Fig. 3.2.)
       Now for an extended discussion l offer a typical passage, where the debtor
  and patriarch La Motte scouts a potential refuge. It appears at the begin-
  ning of chapter 2 and is preceded by an epigraph from Horace Walpole's The
  Mysterious Mother (1768), which raises in the context of Radcliffe's work the
 threat of incest, along with some other real threats that appear environmental
 in Gibson's terms or "circumstantial" in both legal and generic terms; in the
 last line of the epigraph you'll find my argument in a nutshell.




F 1c u Mt 3. z. N~tley Abbey (c. 1833). John Conslable. (Courtesy of the Herbert F. Johnson Museum,
Bequ~st of David B. Goodstein, Class of 1954}
HOSTIL E    l!NVIRONMENTS           IN   R/\O C LIPFE'S   ROMANCE                      103

   I-low these antique towers and vacant courts
   Chill lhc suspended soul! Till expectation
   Wears lhc face of fear: and fear, half ready
   To become devotion , mu1ters a kind
   Of menial orison, it docs not wherefore.
   What a kind of being is circumstance!
                                 H OR A C P.   WALPOLE



   He [La Motte] approached, and perceived the Gothic remains of an ab-
   bey: it stood on a kind of rude lawn, overshadowed by high and spreading
   trees, which seemed coeval with th e building, and diffused a romantic gloom
   around. The greater part of the pile appeared to be sinking into ruins, and that,
   which had withstood the ravages oftime, shewed the remaining features of the
   fabric more awful in decay. The lofty battlements, thickly enwreathed with
   ivy, were half demolished , and become the residence of birds of prey. (14-15)

As Umwelt researchers ourselves, what does this passage teach us about hos-
 tile environments, remembering that, for a contemporaneous aesthetic theo-
rist like William Gilpin, " the ruins of abbeys ... being naturalized to the soil,
might indeed, without much impropriety, be classed" as a natural part of the
landscape?32 A few observations in outline before expanding.
      1) As opposed to Gibson's enclosure or shelter, La Motte is said to perceive
first "the Gothic remains of an Abbey" that was once the "pride of monkish
devotion." The abbey is a place built in part for the sake of brutal penitence;
at the same time it is half ruined, revealing it "might yet shelter some human
being" like La Motte and his crew but also, possibly, some other shady char-
acters like the banditti they had just escaped. In this way counterfactuals are
essential to the environment as given. Plausibly the Abbey could be this and it
could be that, depending upon the situation that remains carefully undecid-
able as the narrative unfolds.
     2) The high and spreading trees seem gloomily romantic to whom? This is
free indirect discourse that intermingles the perspective of author, character,
and reader. So yes we might say with a certain Gibson that the high and spread-
ing trees are not real because they are merely invoked by words on a page,
which means it is immaterial to ask whose perspective would render them so
gloomy. But when it comes to our human environment, can't something be
in fact gloomily romantic? And how can we best research an environmental
fact such as this? We might set out with The Sibley Guide to Trees in hand. No
luck.n We might track and then interview a few of our goth students on a
similar field trip. Better, but not great. Best we carefully read Tl,e Romance of
the Forest and follow up with relevant research in literary and cultural history.
     3) Still, aren't these just amusing figments of the author's imagination,
 104                                                          C HAPTER THREE


  projections onto the natural world, mere anthropomorphism, as Zunshine
  suggests? To function formally, this complex environment must in fact of-
  fer its inhabitants aU sorts of trans-species affordances defined "mutually"
  as Gibson ,...·ould have it (8). Threatening creatures thereby co-constitute this
  hostile environment which at the same time affords La Motte and his cohort
   refuge. Replace "birds of prey" with giant snails on the lofty battlements, and
   the genre changes completely.
       My wager is that a Gothic novel like The Romance of the Forest is best
  equipped to capture this kind of mutuality, which entails precisely the kind
  of environmental ambivalence where invitation and threat coexist. If these
  animals and environments are not real at one level of description - La Motte
  wasn't a living human being and there was no abbey quite like this- the
  "mutuality of animal and environment," that is, the relationality, is real
  enough, and at the most appropriate level of detail given the rhetorical situa-
  tion where we choose to describe a hostile environment. An actual La Motte
  and an actual abbey would by no means afford you better Umwelt research
  if you are interested in hostile and not just dangerous environments. Again
  recall Gibson: The unit you choose for describing the environment depends
 on the level of the environment you choose to describe. Now I'll elaborate.
      After the first imperfect view of the edifice (Radcliffe, 14), which offers
 La Motte this initial image not unlike Constable's melancholic scene, the
 first concrete possibility emerges by way of contrast, as the crew considers
 how they might survive the night. The carriage had been disabled and could
 not even "afford a shelter" so after a few moments of silence they return to
the most habitable part of the ruin (30). Now settled tolerably- creatures
comforted-a new possibility emerges out of the loosely defined structure
coming into focus as the days unfold. At that point the narrator tells us for
Adeline "the forest, which at first seemed to her a frightful solitude, had lost
its terrific aspect; and that edifice, whose half demolished walls and gloomy
desolation had struck her mind with the force of melancholy and dismay,
was now be held as a domestic asylum, and a safe refuge from the storms of
power" (34). Under this description Adeline's domestic wherewithal is exer-
cised for the first time as a quality of her character emerges only in relation:
Adeline overlooks and manages "the little affairs of the household" with ad-
mirable exactness (34). The very same structure under physical description
is some combination of gothic remains, den of thieves, shelter, asylum, and
home, each as real as the next, and each revealing to the one who "overlooks"
very different exactitudes depending upon the situation. Which subject-
object relation prevails in the narrative at any given time says a lot about the
character in question and the narrative point.
HOSTII.C   CNVJRO N MllNTS     IN   RAD C LIFFe's    ROMANCE                 105
      Asylum - domestic or otherwise- turns out to be a dangerous proposi-
  tion in itself: because it is granted by the powers that be, and as subject to,
 absolute security is never a given. Security granted through formal asylum
 only makes explicit a vulnerability we all share as our well-being is depen-
 dent upon others. "How had my imagination deceived me!" Adeline says as
 the La Mattes first appear untrustworthy. "What a picture did it draw of the
 goodness of the world! And must I then believe that every body is cruel and
 deceitful? No- let me still be deceived ... " (150). Self-deception constitutes
 the basic condition of trust and well-being, or to put this differently we are
 always vulnerable and achieve some sense of security through our commit-
 ments to an environment that includes other people. I try to fit in ... nothing
 that bad could happen, could it? This is a special awareness of Gothic fiction:
 much anxiety and tension rising to the level of terror derives from depen-
 dence upon others who may not have one's best interest in mind. Or terror
 derives from dependence upon institutions like law, convent, and even family
 that form our initial disadvantages and inevitably betray our trust. Thus also
the suspense that characterizes Gothic fiction on the level of epistemology,
where certainty is never guaranteed. We rely upon a stranger who may turn
out to be a savior or our worst nightmare, upon relations that may turn out to
be our closest family and at the same time our undoing, upon stories where
credibility seems always poised on the brink of unraveling to the point where
what one thinks initially is exactly the opposite of what one discovers later
on. The conditions for knowing something are famously unstable in Gothic
fiction, "neither here nor there" (145) as the domestic Peter tells stories in a
manner that finds some analogy at the level of novelistic structure. Even the
surgeon does no better than the domestic. The surgeon is a character at the
fringes of science where idealized knowledge becomes in fact life-threatening.
"My mind is not of that frivolous kind to be affected by circumstances," says
the surgeon just as he botches terribly the treatment of Adeline's injured
lover, Theodore (186 ). What a kind of being is circumstance, indeed.
     Nor does a natural-scientific, illusion dispelling, perspective prevail as
Radcliffe is read famously by Walter Scott: "all circumstances of her narra-
tive, however mysterious and apparently superhuman, were to be accounted
for on natural principles at the winding up of the story. " 34 This is the famous
"supernatural explained." But is this right? We should pay better attention
to the way in which Radcliffe herself frames such explanation. In the midst
of reading the horrible manuscript that we later learn is her father's journal-
unto-death, for example, Adeline pauses. "A hollow sigh seemed to pass near
Adeline and she cried 'Holy Virgin, protect me!', as she threw a fearful glance
around the room: 'this is surely something more than fancy"'(134). Murmur-
 106                                                          C H.-\PTER THREE

 ings and obscure fleeting figures pursued Emily through the night but when
 she awoke in the morning, "the cheerful sun-beams played upon the case-
 ments, and dispelled illusions of darkness: her mind, soothed and invigo-
 rated by sleep, rejected the mystic and turbulent promptings of imagination."
  ls this supernatural explained simply by fancy exposed to the light of day?
 Absolutely not, which is what Radcliffe conveys in the very next sentence
  that reveals a new and even more threatening haunt than the one appearing
  previously: "this transient gleam of peace fled upon the appearance of the
  Marquis ... " (134). Radcliffe's transitions reveal the supernatural not in terms
 of enlightenment, which has its limits, nor in terms of religion after the fail,
  but rather in terms of the everyday where real threats take spectral form -
  slipping through our fingers and evading our glances, just out of earshot- at
  the same time that they threaten in the most concrete ways. Explaining the
 supernatural isn't disenchantment as many post- Enlightenment thinkers
 would have it, but more often in the hands of Radcliffe this is a mere dist in -
 guishing gesture that ultimately fails to separate the learned classes from the
   g;norant, the superstitious from the truly religious, or in the case of Adeline,
    character threatened virtually by the stuff of imagination or actually by the
   1arquis who is also, of course, the stuff of imagination on many levels in-
 cluding on the level of "fiction" that provides the novel its basic conceit. The
 Marquis is a fiction. But is he? In a formula : real terror, the novel reminds
 us, is fictional. Terror unlike danger is the stuff of uncertainties as it takes
 provisional shape and is characterized with respect to our fragile sense of
 well-being. 35 Hence also the centrality of rhetoric per se, as human being is
done up in certain ways.
     Later when Adeline falls directly under the power of the Abbey's lawful
owner, the Marquis de Montalt, the Marquis is given by Radcliffe a line that
turns on the keyword asylum, which now appears in all of its ironic force.
With designs on Adeline, and La Motte himself against the wall, the Mar-
quis offers Adeline dubious protection: "accept from me the protection
he cannot afford" (122). Adeline, at wit's end, throws "a trembling glance
upon the prospect around her" and finds that she is at that point practically
a subset of La Motte who declares "we are encompassed with dangers" ( now
remember Lewin's "hopeless situation" where reso urces are foreclosed). In
this case promise = threat: this is precisely the rhetoric of affordances. The
Marquis makes a promise to Adeline, an offer "which may afford you at least
an honorable asylum" (125). But of course this promise is the worst kind of
threat as Radcliffe provides readers an ironic viewpoint they would share
with Adeline: abuse of power defines the situation so the affordance is the
reverse of what's promised. Instead of honorable, asylum for Adeline would
1-1 0 S T I I. P,   E N V I It O N M E N T S   I N   It A D C L I I' I' E ' S   RO M A N C E   107

 be dishonorable and even deadly as the abbey finally appears as a potential
 slaughterhouse (338 ). When early in the habitation La Motte sees pheasants
 and garden deer - including a friendly fawn - not as neighboring creatures
 but as "a profusion of game" ( 23 ), he also foreshadows how he and his crew
 will be hunted and ultimately flushed out of their hiding place, poised for
slaughter.
     Redescription, or the rhetorical figure paradiastole, draws attention to
idiomatic expectations negated: on his first encounter with Adeline, La Motte
chooses not to abandon Adeline to the "care, or rather, to the neglect" of
strangers (12). "Care of strangers" is the idiom that Radcliffe imposes upon
her character La Motte by way of free indirect discourse, punctuated in this
case by the disj unctive clause set off by commas "or rather," which draws
attention to the level at which human environments are basically rhetorical.
Moreover Radcli ffe is well aware how such alternatives are figured as rheto-
ric in the techn ical sense that prevails in that named discipline. Abandon-
ing the sacred rhetoric that should have been her calling, the Lady Abbess
is condemned by Adeline: " It was her method ... to denounce and terrify
rather than to persuade and allure" (36). When it comes to human being,
threats and promises are fundamentally tied up in language, or recalling Gib-
son's distinction, they are direct not indirect. More precisely, the threats and
promises tied up in language are direct at the level of what J. L. Austin called
the perlocutionary (or rhetorical) act, which gets someone to realize or do
something like be alarmed or flee. They can be indirect at the level of the il-
locutionary act where, for example, the words mean one thing literally but do
in context exactly the opposite. The ruffian says to La Motte "be comforted"
and then Radcliffe uses sparingly a graphic device to emphasize irony: "These
comfortable words renewed the terror of La Motte" (7). So Gibson's direct/
indirect distinction can help us understand human environments but not
at the threshold of language and other systems that would be supervenient
upon our pre-linguistic animality. The distinction can help us distinguish
threats and promises at the level of rhetorical analysis where our animality,
including our language, sit cunningly askew. "I know not whether I ought
to congratulate or console you on this trying occasion," admits M . Verneuil
as he twists the plot yet again for Adeline (349), and the reader knows not
either because both speech acts-congratulations and consolation-might
be appropriate depending upon where one is in the story and which elements
merit attention.
    At this point, refining Gibson means paying attention to key categorical
distinctions already built into our world. Radcliffe shows how affordances are
not just itemized threats and promises relative to the organism, nor are they
108                                                           C HAPTER THREE


 relative to human being, but rather are itemized relative to a particular sort
 of person or an individual. Most importantly, Gothic horrors impose them-
  selves upon the middling sort including, presumably, the reader along with
  La Motte and his crew. On one end of the social spectrum we have the do-
  mestics like Peter, in whom "curiosity was more prevalent than fear" (19) to
  the point where he "knew no fear" as his mind becomes wholly occupied with
  the business at hand (45). Essentially Peter has no emotional intelligence of
  his own, but instead serves an important function as a vehicle for the "intel -
  ligence" he is regularly gathering and transmitting as it is filtered through his
  own inscrutable designs (49 ). "Fear" is more for the middling sort like Ade-
  line, who is nonetheless dependent upon someone like Peter if her fear is to
  be realized. Though Peter seems at times to be lacking his own intelligence, he
  is a vehicle for the intelligence of certain others: "Adeline waits for Peter, ob-
  sen'ing his countenance, hoping it might afford some degree of intelligence
  on the subject of her fears" (138); meanwhile Peter and especially his fellow
  domestic Annette are constantly retreating from the world that matters, or
  as Lewin might say, they are characterized precisely in their retreat from the
  world, Aus-dem-Felde-Gehe11. At the other end of the social spectrum is the
  Marquis de Montalt, as removed from domestic service as one can be, but
 equally fearless. A physician markedly more compassionate than the surgeon
 worries that Theodore's situation is desperate not only because he is injured
 but because he appears to be at the mercy of the Marquis, whose emotional
life may not be recognizable to someone of the middling sort, at the same
 time that it is deeply consequential for those in his sphere of influence. "The
character of the Marquis is too well known to suffer him either to be loved
or respected," observes the physician, "from such a man you have nothing to
hope, for he has scarcely anything to fear" (202). In some basic ways every-
thing that happens around the abbey is stamped by this political economy of
emotion, where hope and fear in the sense of obligation have unidirectional
vectors, with the Marquis in the middle. As Kurt Lewin was aware, affor-
dances have an emotional valence that can be a function of power. At one
point Madame La Motte reflects upon how her husband is obligated to the
Marquis "whose territory ... afforded him a shelter from the world" at the
same time that it was in the Marquis' power "to betray him into the hands of
his enemies" (210); this is Lewin's Umweltkriifte. Up to a point, the entire eco-
system Radcliffe gives us in The Romance of the Forest- including landscape
and its creatures-is shaped by these secular powers.
      But the story doesn't end there. From the very outset such secular pow-
ers like the Marquis and his territory give way to a religious sensibility that
is equally material. After her first night in the abbey, Adeline looks out the
HOSTILE ENVIRONMENTS            IN   R A D CL IPrE's   ROMAN C F.               109

window upon an open part of the forest: "it seemed as if Heaven was opening
to the view" ( 22.). Indeed, "The scene before her soothed her mind, and ex-
alted her thoughts to the great Author of Nature; she uttered an involuntary
prayer: 'Father of good, who made this glorious scene! I resign myself to thy
hands ... "' ( 22.). As the epigraph to chapter J has it, external nature is in some
sense scripted, but obscurely, just like the civilization imposed by someone
like the Marquis: "are not these woods More free from peril than the envious
court1 Here feel we but the penalty of Adam .. ." (33, citing Shakespeare, As
You Like It II.1.3 -7). Much later arriving at the foot of Montanvert on the
way to the earthly paradise that is Leloncourt, Adeline views the astonishing
objects around her and says it is "as if we were walking over the ruins of the
world, and were the only persons who had survived the wreck" (265), which,
we are told in the notes by Chloe Chard, references Thomas Burnet's theory
in Telluris Theoria Sacra (Amsterdam, 1694) that mountains were not cre-
ated directly by God, but were formed as a product of the Flood and consti-
tute " ruins" of previous natural formations (3900265). At Leloncourt, La Luc
articulates this theo-geology at the level of concrete being. Though we try
to comprehend the sublimity of the Deity who first "called us into being,"
we fail in part, but can still grasp at that portion of nature communicated.
Recalling Lisa Zunshine, wouldn't religious illusions such as this count as
mere mental projection, anthropomorphism, and pathetic fallacy? As if to
anticipate such skepticism, La Luc responds, "Call them not the illusions of
a visionary brain" (274 ) and we are tempted, in the spirit of Gibson, to apply
this injunction across Radcliffe's entire oeuvre. For people of this sort, the
threats and promises of a world that includes secular powers may be just as
real as the threats and promises of the world that includes nonsecular pow-
ers, whether environmental in Gibson's sense, or religious in the Christian
sense voiced by La Luc. "Seems" and "appears" are thus crucial devices for
the author Radcliffe, who works precisely at the point of indeterminacy where
concrete possibilities meet; feeling but the penalty of Adam means that's all
we can do. Thank God. At the end of the story, does it turn out that Adeline
was an instrument of God all along? That appears to be the case (but who's
to say). Why, asks the narrator, did the Marquis dispose of his brother but
not his infant niece, Adeline, who stood between the Marquis and his wishes?
That oversight "seems somewhat surprising," the narrator concedes on the
realism-of-motives principle, "unless we admit that a destiny hung over him
on this occasion, and that she was suffered to live as an instrument to punish
the murder of her parent" (343). In fact the book ends not with the super-
natural explained; it ends more or less with a trial and the king's justice. But
that resolution is cut short by the Marquis' suicide and this sense of divine
110                                                         C HAP Tflt   THRE E

justice that remains a viable alternative, an ever-present but never fully real-
ized opportunity for Umstmkt11rierrmg as Lewin might say: transformation
of the total field.
    Now to conclude this chapter. If you want to research the hostile work
environment you need to know about the law and some of the relevant cases.
 But what if you want to know about other sorts of human environments,
 including hostile, romantic, awkward, thrilling, and so on? Sometimes the
 ecological concerns of natural and social scientists might in fact find their
 most inviting home in the wilds of literature.
                                      4

  Mixed Feelings in Jane Austen's Sense and Sensibility




Mixed feelings are at the heart of Jane Austen's novel Sense and Sensibility,
and we think we know what that means, like a recipe: combine two parts a
feeling like gratitude, one part happiness, a dash of resentment and you get
something like Elinor. But mixed feelings in the novel and beyond are poorly
served by this disequilibrium model recalling the long tradition back to
Galen. 1 In fact, mixed feelings are a matter of negotiated circumstances where
feelings may be at odds as they converge on character. Hence the significance
of literature and particularly the sentimental novel as a cross-disciplinary re-
search domain, where this kind of rhetorical situation is exquisitely detailed.
Referencing the science of situated emotion (Barsalou, Barrett) and behav-
ioral economics (Kahneman on bias and persuasion), this chapter offers a
new way to understand mixed feelings as rhetorically situated. At the same
time, it explores a methodological opportunity at the interface of science and
the humanities, beyond recent work in Cognitive Approaches to Literature,
which frequently proceeds unecologically toward theory of mind.
     Perhaps it is not surprising that Jane Austen's Sense and Sensibility hinges
on mixed feelings. After all, its title foregrounds the arc of two characters-a
more sensible Elinor and sister Marianne-as they mutually modify toward
a happy ending. Paying homage to Austen's utilitarian concern that I'll dis-
cuss below, we calculate their feelings mixed at the novel's midpoint bet\veen
emotional states more stable. 2 In our day such a midpoint calculation might
even be realized visually with blending algorithms like this one from the 2005
 Virtual Reality article, " Mixed Feelings: Expression of Nonbasic Emotions in
 a Muscle-Based Talking Head" (Fig. :4.1). What is creepy about these images?
 I think that the blended images in the middle are especially uncanny because
112                                                                                C HAPT ER              FOUR




          sadness                              renu>rse                              feur
          a =- 17.2                            n = 4.6                               a= 1-1.R
          ,=  - -IO.I                          r = - 26. J                           , ~ - 44 .-1
          r = 43.6                             , = 26,7                              r = 46.8
          "' = ~"6.S                            w = 279.9                            c,, = 288.4




           jo)                                  gratification                         s;,dne~s
           a • 17.3                             a = - 1-1.9                           c, .=r. -   17 .2
           ~   = 42.2                           , 33.1                                ,. = - 40.1
           , = ~5 .6                            , = 36.3                              r   = -13.6
           w = 67.7                             w = 114.2                             w   = 246.H
 FIG u RE 4 . 1 . "The emotional expression in the middle has been obtained from those at the left and right
 using the blending algorithm. The radius rand the angle on the emotion disc x determine the influence
 ofeach generating expr,ession and hence the degree of similarity to the new one. The first example is a not
 too active, but rather negative emotion, while the second one could be pleasa nt surprise, and the last one
 unpleasant surprise." (Reproduced with permission from Springer Nature)



 they depict emotions mathematically unhinged even from implied human-
 ity.3 But more on the creepy side of math later.
      Returning to Austen, we might alternatively figure emotional stabil-
ity in terms of a trial-filled journey as the novel opens with the Dashwood
women happily "settled" in Sussex (3) and ends with them happily resettled
in Barton and Delaford where "strong family affection" is easily communi-
cated (289). 4 Generally speaking, the homeostatic formula EMOTIONAL
STABILITY➔ MIXED FEELINGS ➔ EMOTIONAL STABILITY might char-
acterize the novel, its central characters, and even a version of our own folk
psychology that would locate basic emotions in the person and then treat
their mixture as some kind of measurable midpoint5: "I FEEL NOT HALF
BAD." "I HAVE HALF A MIND TO ..." where the dot dot dot of aposiopesis
M IXED FE E LI NG S I N   /1. U S T E N ' S   S E NS E A N /)   S E NS I CJ I I. I T Y   llJ

 leads to nothing good, while the equivalent German idiom, "Ich hatte fast
 Lust zu . . ." confirms that the half mind we are talking about in this case is
 indeed the emotional half. "I FEEL TORN," in half we can presume, if Gilles
 Fauconnier and Mark Turner were right about conceptual blending. 6 To sum-
 marize, we still live in the wake of a general utilitarianism famously articu-
 lated by Jeremy Bentham just before Austen drafted in the 1790s a precursor
 epistolary novel " Elinor and Marianne." For the crass utilitarian, emotion,
 and most importantly happiness, can be quantified and therefore halved. 7
      But who wants to be a crass utilitarian? Certainly not Jeremy Bentham,
as I will note below. Then which alternatives do we have, beyond Coleridge?8
 Fewer than o ne might think, because the fog of pre-calculation hangs heav-
 ily, as we will see. However, with the help of Jane Austen and some unlikely
aUies in our contemporary psychological and cognitive sciences, I will pose
in this chapter an alternative where the rhetorical situation is central-more
 precisely, I will explore how mixed feelings materialize in reference values
 that are negotiated only by way of rhetoric. Now back to our muscle-based
talking heads.
      Blending algorithms no doubt have their application. Art is transformed
by the aesthetics of a mathematical procedure that gives us Pixar, and feel-
ings by a newly reliable form of expression that would allow us to track their
mixed physiognomy back to basics. "Basic emotions" are again a techni-
cal designation defended by evolutionary psychologist Paul Ekman. These
are emotions evolved for their adaptive value in dealing with fundamental
life tasks such as achievements, losses, frustrations, and threats, where the
paradigm is ingesting something repulsive as a cause for disgust, or ingest-
ing something attractive as a cause for enjoyment (see chapter 1 for im-
ages and discussion ). Take "surprise," which we will revisit in Austen by
way of astonishment. For Ekman, the term "basic" postulates among other
things "that other non-basic emotions are combinations of the basic emo-
tions, which may be called blends or mixed emotional states," for example,
smug = enjoyment + contempt, though he offers the qualification that what
we perceive as mixed emotions on the face are likely basic emotions pass-
ing in microseconds.9 In comparison to a basic emotions approach, Austen's
emotional rhetoric will seem quaint, wordy, and relatively obscure. Does that
mean that the rhetoric of emotion is dead, at least from a scientific perspec-
tive? Perhaps not, and in fact the rhetoric of emotion may be newly evident
if we return to Austen from the perspective of our post-utilitarian moment,
which I will explain below.
     The key Sense and Sensibility scene comes in the final Volume Ill when
Elinor, in reciprocal love with unavailable Edward, is obliged to inform her
114                                                             C HAPTER     l'OUR

beloved that his languishing engagement to rival Lucy might now be real-
ized since Colonel Brandon has promised him a small rectory with income
enough to support a modest marriage. As Elinor prepares to write Edward,
he appears suddenly on the scene. For the second time in so many chapters
 Elinor is astonished 10 and feels "particularly uncomfortable for some min-
 utes" (217) before she delivers the news with congratulations, reporting with
 some irony the hoo per annum might just establish all his "views of happi -
 ness" (218), including, it is presumed, his marriage to Lucy. The narrator tells
 us, "What Edward felt, as he could not say it himself, it cannot be expected
 that anyone else should say for him. He looked all the astonishment which
 such unexpected, such unthought-of information could not fail of exciting;
 but he said only these two words: ' Colonel Brandon!"'
     So in this most emotional scene, our crass utilitarian efforts are frustrated
 on at least three levels. First, contra Lisa Zunshine, Blakey Vermeule, and
 like-minded literary critics (see previous chapter), mind reading per se is
 frustrated insofar as Edward's legibility is denied not only in terms of external
 expression, but also in terms of feeling that the narrator tells us Edward could
 not say to himself. This would make any pre-calculation of happiness or of
 any other emotion difficult, to say the least. Second, contra calculating ex-
 ternaLists, including the character Marianne, who would look to the face for
 physiognomic truths, Edward's emotional expression refers only to absence
 at the heart, but not apathy. A physiognomist sees on Edward's face only "as-
 tonishment" (Fig. 4.2) that registers, in its unadulterated form, nothing but
 change per se, or what the narrator calls "excitement." Like our muscle-based
 talking head, canonic representations of astonishment 11 incorporate the sca-
 lar inflection admiration and fear , suggesting that it is difficult to picture as-
 tonishment per se. In fact the 1833 Pride and Prejudice "astonishment" illus-
 tration relies not primarily upon physiognomy, despite Mr. Bennet's bugging
 eyes, but fundamentally upon context, including narrative reference points
 that situate Mr. Bennet's astonishment at the awkward moment when trepi-
 dation about Darcy is no longer viable because he has saved Elizabeth's sister
 Lydia, though a sentimental resolution is still nowhere in sight. Indeed this
 moment is awkward in the most profound sense because it destabilizes the
emotional arc in both temporal directions as the focal characters, and we
as readers, must revise feelings already felt-since prejudice against Darcy's
"pride" turns out to be unjustified. Another way to put this is that the cap-
tion referencing in turn the narrative is essential. Astonishment- or what we
now call surprise12-renders any calculation of happiness or another basic
emotion difficult if not impossible since it is only a common denominator
that registers: fear over surprise, admiration over surprise, anger over sur-
MIX!!D    FEELINGS       IN     A U STl'.N ' s           SENSE AND SENSJIIILITY

prise, and so on through the six "brief and episodic" emotions that Ekman
distinguishes from enduring emotions like love or boredom that he prefers to
call "affective commitments." 13 (See Fig. 4 .3.)
    In fact, scientists of emotion have always confronted this problem in the
laboratory, since fMRI or other measures of emotional response must ac-
count for the response phenomenon itself; that response phenomenon his-
torically has registered as attention or "excitement" or indeed "surprise."
For instance, the eminent psychologist Jerome Kagan cites one gender study




                         • /,/4.,.- d<·,.,, . lcU /,,,~u .. t'N/u~-1 C. -I?.'. ~;~~-t.o,J.'
                          hn,/ .v<,,>b,.n£<.,,,,')' , ltw.r , frl_._'./y~ u,. c ;//A":
                          /un -1,/. h,· >, e,  4 ;/,/,   ,~.nt ~,u.:,,A,,,~;...n b




FIGURE 4.2 . "She then told him what Mr. Darcy had voluntarily done for Lydia. He heard her with
astonishment." Illustration from Pride ""d Prejudice by Jane Austen. Engraved by William Greatbatch
1833. Mr. &nnet is on the left, Elizabeth on the right.
116                                                                                      C H/\PTER                   FOUR




                                                                .tfl.l!FR.~T/l!_'V J/7 "/'' 7/ .t.~f't'>.l'IJH.. lf.!".V"I'



FIGURE 4.3. [Left] Charles Le Brun, Expression Studies: Aslonishmenl with Fea r. Black chalk, pen
and black ink on paper. (©Musee du Louvre, Dist. RMN-Grand Palais / Martine Beck-Coppob / Ari
Resource, reproduced with permission) [Right] Admiration with astonishment. Rc<l/ brown ink. Stipple
Engraving 1785 after C harles Le Brun. From Bowles's PassiotlS of rlre Soul. (Wellcomc Library, London,
CC BY 4.0)


 where subjects judging facial expressions in a laboratory took longer to
 decide whether a man's face was fearful because they did not expect to see
 photos of fearful men (63). Generally Kagan urges us to consider relations
 between an emotional incentive and a brain profile- for example, a fea r-
 ful face photograph and the viewing subject's amygdala activity-in terms
of response uncertainty or surprise, not just in terms of incentive-response
matching where a fearful face maps directly onto a fearful subject response. 1•
Likewise in our Austen passage, astonishment obscures precisely because it is
reflexive and all too predictable; it is a reaction "such unthought-of informa-
tion could not Jail of exciting."
    So here is the question. Would a God's eye perspective, or an advanced
measurement system, or airtight evolutionary psychology allow us to resolve
or read Edward's mixed feelings as an implied human being, 15 if not a real
one? No, according to Austen, who finally frustrates this fantasy by withhold -
ing omniscient narration at the crucial juncture. But then aren't we left only
with skepticism and nothing at all to say about mixed feelings, undermining
both our analysis and perhaps more importantly the story itself? The first
anti-skeptical clue should come from the simple fact that Austen's story does
proceed, and quite successfully if our continued interest and reception his-
tory is to be any indication; even philosophers like Gilbert Ryle and Alister
MIXED FEllL ING S            IN   AU S TEN'S        SENSE      /\ND SE::NS/ll/L/TY                          117
                                                                                                       16
McIntyre have read Jane Austen as a narrator of emotional equilibrium. So
how does the story proceed? By way of mixed feelings understood in con-
trast to the Ekman program of basic emotions. Now I will briefly turn to
this contrastive understanding as it has emerged recently in cognitive science
research.
    In their important critique of the basic emotion program culminating in
the 20J1 Neuropsychologia article "Grounding Emotion in Situated Concep-
tualization," Lawrence Barsalou, Lisa Feldman Barrett, and their colleagues
render Kagan's uncertainty problem productive by first separating with catch
trials the response to an emotional incentive and what they call its concep-
tllalization (u12)Y Take a look (Fig. 4.4) at Sen. Jim Webb's face in (a) and
name what emotion you see. Most say anger, or something similar. Now take
a look at the la rger con text ( b) and name what emotion you see. Most say
"elation" or something si milar. Instrument- and perception-based findings
frame what these researchers call the "emotion paradox" where people can
automatically see Jim Webb as either angry or elated, depending upon the
image, even though sufficient information for this judgment is not unam-
biguously displayed o n his face or body. 18 How can we do this? Because, Bar-
rett and Barsalou argue, emotions are not brain mechanisms triggered in a
stereotyped and obligatory way as if a coiled snake triggers the fear circuit
instinctually ("Ground ing Emotion," 1105). Instead emotions are funda-
mentally situated, and we have a sense for how these situations work even




F rcu R l 4 . 4 . "Look at United States Senator Jim Webb in ( a). Taken out of context, he looks agit3ted
and aggressive. Yet look al him again in (b). When situated, he appears happy and excited. Without con•
text, and with only the structural information from the face as a guide, it is easy to mistJke the emo1ion
that you sec in ano ther person. A similar error in perception was said to haw cost HO\,·ard De~n the
opponunity to run for President of the United States in 2004.'' (Original photogrnph by Doug Mills/The
New York Timcs/ Rcdux. Reprinted as formalled in Trc11tls i11 Cog11itil•c Scic11ces, Vol. 11, No. 8, edit~d by
Lis, Feldman Barrett, Kristen A. Lindquist, and Maria Gendron, " L,nguage as Cont~xt for the Perception
of Emotion," p. 328, 2007, with permission from Elsevier. Original photo reproduced with permission
from Rcdux Piclures.)
118                                                                  C HAPTER PO UR

when the situations themselves are ambiguous. Essentially Barrett and Barsa-
lou want to test in a laboratory this lucid passage from Knight Dunlap's 1932
article on situated emotion: "I may apprehend my situation primarily as one
in which my welfare is threatened. I call my inner responses fear. You may
apprehend my situation as one in which I fight against the threat; you say I
am angry. Which is correct? The answer may be: Both!" 19 Now you may won -
der about the brain physiology in this case. Would a brain scan of Dunlap's
subject reveal significant differences if the situation was associated with the
emotional concept fear as opposed to anger? Barrett and Barsalou say yes, and
here is their account.
    Fear of a runner who becomes lost on a wooded trail at dusk differs from
the fear of someone unprepared to give an important prese ntation at work
because the agent conceptualizes the situations differently ("Ground ing
Emotion," 1108) and therefore mobilizes different aspects of the emotional
brain-in the case of social fear, clusters are mobilized in the left dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex and inferior frontal gyms, which are together associated
with executive control, not motor response. In other words, social fear gets
our wheels spinning, physical fear gets our legs moving (1124) . Moreover two
different emotions-in this case fear and anger - produce significantly dif-
ferent brain images not because these emotions evolved for their adaptive
value in dealing with different life tasks a la Ekman, but because their situated
conceptualization differs. So how does the experiment proceed ? In a manner
that speaks to the literary humanities and especially the art of rhetoric.

       In an initial training phase, participants became familiar with two situation
      types. Importantly, these situations were constructed so that a participant
      could experience either anger or fear within the context created . . . . On two
      separate days before the critical scans, participants listened to situations of
      each type and rated each situation for familiarity, imagery, and their ability
      to "be there" (i.e., immerse oneself in the situation). As participants listened
      to a situation, they were instructed to immerse themselves in it as deeply as
      possible. Descriptions of the situations were written from the first person
      perspective and contained various details designed to induce immersion.
      ("Grounding Emotion," mo)

In fact when we look at an example below, we will see that descriptions of the
situations were written from the second-person perspective, which begs liter-
ary and rhetorical questions about identification and the ability to "be there,"
or immerse oneself. And although they are careful to explain how "concepts"
are Wittgensteinian without a core (e.g., a "game" has no core though we
can point to prototypes, no6), Barrett and Barsalou could learn more from
MIX   e D p EE I.ING s I N Aus TEN ' s s [; N s F. AN I) s EN s In IL 11' y             119

humanistic philosophers of situated cognition who explore how emotions
function not conceptually by way of representation, but practically. 20 Then
they continue:

   On critical trials during scanning, participants first listened to one of30 physi-
   cal danger or to one of 30 social evaluation core situations mixed randomly
   together. Following the situation, participants heard the word for one of four
   concepts, again mixed randomly: anger, fear, observe, or plan. Participants'
   task on hearing the concept word was to rate how easily they experience the
   concept in the given situation. ("Grounding Emotion," mo) [The two non -
   emotion abstract concepts "observe" and "plan" were included for compari-
   son purposes.]

Comparing data, the research team concludes that specific instances of emo-
tion are constructed d ynamically within neural circuitry distributed across
the brain to represent an emotion in a particular situation (1125).
    The neurophysiology of mixed feelings is for Barrett and Barsalou situa-
tional, and "situation" is defined by familiar narrative and rhetorical qualities.
Protocols for writing these mini -narratives are telling, as they may remind
you of Cicero's courtroom vivacity2 1 or C reative Writing 101, which typically
has an assignment that goes something like this: Describe with sensory detail
a setting and activity performed by someone with relevant personal attributes;
describe an action, consequence, and resulting somatosensory experience.22 Here
is an example of a social evaluation situation that practically places you in a
scene from Sense and Sensibility, where awkward situations abound. Imagine
this scenario you may remember from my introduction:

   You're at a dinner party with friends. A debate about a contentious issue arises
   that gets everyone at the table talking. You alone bravely defend the unpopu-
   lar view. Your comments are met with sudden uncomfortable silence. Your
   friend s are looking down at their plates, avoiding eye contact with you. You
   feel your chest tighten.

In this situation, again, would I be angry at myself for going out on a limb,
or fearful that my friends might distance themselves further? That would de-
pend upon the situation, which would need more details including my rela-
tionship to interested onlookers and the view I defended. Now returning to
Austen's critique of utilitarianism, my mixed feelings would be determined
not by any predictable calculation but rather in dynamic relationship with
onlookers who might in fact be extrinsic. Let me explain.
    If you recall in Edward's astonishment scene, our utilitarian efforts as
readers are explicitly frustrated. Although Elinor is implicated by the "look"
only she could grant at that moment, "anyone"-including the reader-is
120                                                                   C HAPTER      FOUi!


denied the insight that would come with an emotional label; Elinor and
then we, as happiness calculators, are disabled. Remember the entire scene
is framed by a mockery of utilitarian calculation that would have all Edward's
views of happiness realized by a sum lying somewhere between £200 and x =
the availability of Colonel Brandon's servants, carriage, cows, and poultry, as
"secretly" calcuJated by Lucy in the following scene ( 221). In light of Barrett
and Barsalou, we can say that Edward's mixed feelings are defined by inter-
ested onlookers who, in this case, include us. 23
     Disingenuously (198), Elinor earlier explains the situation to Marianne in
 terms of what we now call "expected utility" that rationally calculates absolute
 value: '"Edward will marry Lucy; he will marry a woman superior in person
 and understanding to half her sex; and time and habit will teach him to forget
 that he ever thought another superior to lier."' Looking ahead to Kahneman
 and Tversky, we observe that Marianne offers Elinor a critique of expected
 utility by addressing Elinor as a non-abstract and unaveraged person who
 should be interested not in absolute value, but in her own relative superiority
 to Lucy. '"If such is your way of thinking,"' replies Marianne, "'if the loss of
 what is most valued is so easily to be made up by something else, your resolu-
 tion, your self-command, are, perhaps, a little less to be wondered at."'
     Not no feelings, to use the double negative Austen found so stylistically
 congenial. Mixed feelings that tempt us to read along with astonishment,
 excitement, gratitude, and happiness, perhaps also love, regret, shame, un-
 happiness, disgust, terror, melancholy, and we could go on like Elinor who
 finally sits down to "reconsider the past, recall the words and endeavour to
 comprehend all the feelings of Edward; and, of course, to reflect on her own
 with discontent" (219). Thus our analysis proceeds not despite, but precisely
 because of the mixed feelings that Austen treats masterfully when considered
 from this perspective of recent cognitive science and post-utilitarian psychol-
 ogy, including the influential Daniel Kahneman article to which we will now
 turn: "Reference Points, Anchors, Norms, and Mixed Feelings." 24
     Explicitly for Kahneman, mixed feelings are not calculable intermediates
 but rather ambivalencies that reference multiple points subject to what he
calls, depending upon the example, negotiation or persuasion. Let's see how
this works. Kahneman asks us to
      Consider a man who was given good reason to expect a $5000 raise, but even-
      tually received only $3000. What is the psychological value of that event, as the
      individual experiences it? Obviously, the raise can be coded either as a gain or
      as a loss, depending on whether it is compared to zero or to $5000. A simple
      model is that the raise of $3000 is compared to a single reference point, which
      is a weighted composite of the two salient reference points. This idea is rather
MIX I! D FE I! LI NG S   IN   AUST I! N ' S   SENSE A NU SENS I 1111. IT y              111

   unappealing, however, because it implies that there exists a truly neutral raise,
   somewhere between zero and $5000, such that all larger raises are coded con-
   sistently as gains and all smaller raises as losses. A formulation that may be
   more satisfying is that any raise of less than $5000 is experienced both as a gain
   and as a loss, at different times. (306)


 Practically, mixed feelings in judgment tasks are irresolvable with reference to
 single weighted composites or an averaging formula, or a fixed temporality;
 Kahneman would not be impressed by our blending algorithm, for instance.
 Nor would be Austen, who might poke fun at a crass utilitarian telling the
 $3000 raise recipient the following: " Why don't you just add up your grati-
 tude and resentment, elation and disappointment, happiness and unhappi-
 ness, then divide by two ... now feel that way."
     So what is Kahneman's post-utilitarian alternative? Mixed feelings with
 multiple reference points. And I note Jeremy Bentham himself qualified
any model of calculation that might deliver absolute values for happiness;
 he was no crass utilitarian of the sort we might imagine along with Austen.
Instead, Bentham was deeply interested in what he called "circumstances
influencing sensibility," such as gender, education, and rank, which inevi-
tably bias happiness calculation because they determine the scope of one's
life. "Creteris Paribus," speculates Bentham, "the quantum of sensibility ap-
pears to be greater in the higher ranks of men than in the lower," greater
in women than men, and so on through a list of biases we recognize as his-
torically specific. Bentham's entire project redesigns law and government
around biases that would be most advantageous from the perspective of
the state. 25
     Meanwhile, here is how biases work for Kahneman. In the example above,
the subject references at least the starting salary in comparison to which the
$3000 raise makes him happy, and the "expectation" in comparison to which
the raise makes him unhappy. 26 It is fully in line with Kahneman's complex
approach to also consider the subject's knowledge of comparable situations
(i.e., "What's that guy making?"), the firm's balance sheet, and other refer-
ence values which in this imagined scenario must have been communicated
in such a way that produced unfulfilled expectations. Kahneman makes the
point that negotiators, politicians, and advertisers regularly communicate to
establish reference points that serve their purposes, where that could mean
for instance a labor union negotiator lowballing to reduce expectations, a
politician announcing small initiatives with great fanfare, or an advertiser
exploiting what Kahneman calls elsewhere the "focusing illusion" that en-
courages a consumer to believe that a change of weight, scent, or whatever
122                                                             C IIAP T ER FO U i!

will produce marked improvements in his or her happiness.27 In a nutshell,
 Kahneman ties value to a rhetoric of possibilities.
      Of course, these are all examples of rhetoric in the bad sense of Plato's
 sophistry where subjects are intentionally misled to the disadvantage of at
 least themselves; at points we can see the rhetorical figure paradiastole at
 work when the truth is opposed by false terms, to invoke Renaissa nce rhet-
 orician Henry Peacham. But according to Kahneman, persuasion also has
 its positive ethics; he explains for instance how "a skillful negotiator may be
 able to smooth the sharp edges of loss aversion and outrage in the views of
 the other side, by introducing alternative reference points" (307). "I am not
 losing a vehicle, I am gaining freedom from debt," recom mends the Bank-
 ruptcy Law Network as they troll for customers. "Rem ember you are not
 losing a daughter-you are gaining a son!" To summarize communication ,
 or persuasion, or rhetoric is inillimitable because reference points are not
 fixed absolutely and they are subject to revision. But against Quentin Skin-
 ner's generic account of paradiastole, where " it is always po ssible to argue in
  11tramq11e partem on either side of the case," 28 Kahneman's example shows
 how reference values are lodged in a recalcitrant wo rld subject, however, to
  negotiation.
      In our $3000 raise example, mixed feelings are also inillimitable. But in
 order to identify, analyze, and explain mixed feelings, we can't just ask this
 subject how he feels. We need to establish the relevant reference points that
 produce, according to Kahneman's rather unsatisfying analogy, a duck/rabbit
 effect for the subject where happiness and unhappiness are experienced in-
 termittently (and thus can be frequency normed ): post- not pre-calculated,
 depending upon which reference point is salient at a given moment. 29 Feel-
 ings in this example are mixed, in other words, by way of concrete reference
 points that can be incorporated into a quantitative model. But the model
 is also qualitative at its core; by way of Kahneman's "expectation," rhetoric
 constitutes the finite set of relationships that makes feeling quantifiable in the
 first place (e.g., unhappiness with respect to the $ 5 000 expectation ).
      Kahneman's point is not that utilitarian models are inherently misleading.
 Instead his point is that any good utilitarian model must ultimately account
for the complex contours of psychology and the communication strategies,
or rhetorics, that shape them. And though I'll not make the case here in de-
tail, behavioral economics emerged at least in part by way of rediscovering
the rhetoric of economics we find in the likes of Adam Smith, who in the
latter part of the eighteenth century integrated his work on rhetoric, moral
sentiments, and the wealth of nations. 30 Rhetoric has long been an expert
domain when it comes to emotion or so-called irrationalism, and now that
    MIXE n   F E E LI NG S   I N   A U ST E N ' S   S E N S E A N D S t: N S I II I I. I T Y   123


     irrationalism in the social sciences has once again become interesting, rhe-
     torical studies have a new appeal.
         Irrationalism also returns us finally to poor Edward and Elinor, although
     their situation demonstrates how irrational ism can make all the sense in the
     world. Last we saw them, Edward was feeling mixed in a manner that was
     obscured by astonishment. Following Kahneman, let's call him the subject
     faced with multiple and conflicting reference points, including at least 1) his




I
    gratitude toward Colonel Brandon and Elinor, who have cooperatively en-
    abled his minimal happiness; 2) his resentment toward Colonel Brandon and
    Elinor, who have at the same time disabled his optimal happiness; 3) his sense
    of minimal o bligation towa rd Lucy, whom he had engaged; 4) his sense of
    maximal obligation toward Elinor, whom he had more recently wooed; 5) his
    disgust with whomever, including himself, had put him in this awkward situ-
    ation; and 6) his specific astonishment that Elinor must also populate this last
    catego ry because she had thrown their awkward situation directly in his face.
         In turn, Elino r might be called by Kahneman an interested negotiator,
    and we might call her a skilled rhetorician, even a very, very subtle seducer. If
    you think back over 1 through 6 Elinor has a hand in each: she has extracted
    Edward's gratitude without allowing that he would owe her anything, she has
    confronted Edwa rd with an obvious choice between lowered and raised ex-
    pectations, she has exploited what Kahneman and Tversky famously call loss
    aversion by presenting herself as the more immediate love object at the same
    time that she articulates the very alienation that would force Edward's hand.
    No wonder Edward is not just specifically but also generally astonished.
        But remember, Kahneman would point out how mixed feelings depend
    upon reference points outside the scope of what a negotiator controls, indeed
    outside the scope of any interpersonal situation. The stingy boss may strate-
    gically reference a disappointing balance sheet in contract negotiations, but
    at a certain point the balance sheet is recalcitrant-it is what it is. And of
    course with Austen we are merely reading a work of literary fiction whereas
    in Kahneman's example we are ... well, I guess we are also reading a work of
    literary fiction, in this case an imaginative mini-narrative populated not with
    real human beings but implied human beings for whom context never disap-
    pears completely into the depths of psyche. There is a way in which scenario
    building-even for oneself-always relies upon narrative fictionality.
        When it comes to the phenomenon of mixed feelings, context matters
    fundamentally, which makes Kahneman's social science and Austen's fiction
    different but compatibly insightful. Although the embedding genres are dif-
    ferent, our two examples share this question: What is relevant context for the
    mixed feelings of implied human beings, in this case Elinor and Edward? Paul
 124                                                               C IIAP TER   F OU II

  Goring's The Rhetoric of Se11sil,ility ;,, Eightee11th-Ce11t11ry C11/111re reminds us
  how this question goes beyond a particular Austen novel interested in util-
  itarianism, to at least one of its embedding genres, the sentimental novel.
  Referencing Samuel Richardson's Pamela, Sarah Fielding's T/1e Adve11t11res of
   David Simple, Henry McKenzie's The Ma11 of Feeling, and Laurence Sterne's
  Sentimental Journey, Goring demonstrates how in sentimental fi ction, t he
  rhetoric of emotion depends fundamentall y not just upon the conventions of
  emotional expression a la Lavater (in our day Ekman ) but rather upon scene
  mechanics, including the staging of witnessed eloquence that implicates a
  reader. "In relation to both male and female characters, then , sent im ental
  fiction insists upon an association between visible emotionalism and m odern
  virtue, but the actual e/oq11e11ce of bodies represented in fictio n- the basis of
  their emotive hold over readers, and thus the basis of their social poten tial-
  hangs not only upon their embodiment of eighteenth-century thinking abo ut
  the passions' visibility, but also upon the mechanics of the scenes in which
  they are depicted" (153).31 With Kahneman we conclude that the emotional
 "mechanics of the scene" in sentimental fiction materializes in reference val -
 ues that are negotiated only by way of rhetoric. And this should be no great
 surprise considering that sentimental fiction, including its Sense and Semi-
 bility transformation, was deeply concerned with the interference between
 emotional economies and economies that would be exclusively financial. 32
     By way of conclusion I will focus on the important role played by gos-
sips John Dash wood and Mrs. Jennings, who allow Austen to establish crucial
reference points- indeed we can call them Kahnemanite norms- outside
the immediate purview of the central characters. Epigraphically I offer th is
amusing image from Lisa Feldman Barrett's recent article on the visual im -
pact of gossip where she is interested in how "top-down" affective informa-
tion acquired through gossip influences vision (Fig. 4.5). Kahneman and
Miller's 1986 "Norm Theory: Comparing Reality to Its Alternatives" cites
Barsalou on the way to rejecting the treatment of normality based on formal
or informal conceptions of probability, offering instead what they call a "phe-
nomenology of surprise" (137). For instance, the PERCEIVED ABNORMAL-
ITY of a victim's fate increases sympathy: subjects felt more sympathy for an
imaginary victim who was severely injured during a robbery that took place
in a store to which the victim had decided to go only after finding his regular
store closed for renovations (146). Also the AVAILABILITY OF COUNTER-
FACTUALS increases sympathy: someone who misses a plane by 5 minutes
receives more than someone who misses the plane by 30 minutes because
it's easier to imagine the world where 5 minutes not 30 had been shaved
off (144) .}3 On the other hand, crime victims lose sympathy inadvertently
MIX Ell FE F. L IN GS I N        A US T E N ' S     S F, NS Ii   A NT>   SENS I II IL IT Y                            125

because we tend to consider the ACTIONS OF A FOCAL INDIVIDUAL mu-
table in comparison to background actors, who would be in this case the per-
petrators; hence "blame the victim" (144). Generally, Kahneman and Miller
confirm the correlation between the perception of abnormality of an event
and "the intensity of the affective reaction to it, whether the affective reaction
be one of regret, horror, or outrage" (146). We might say that norms have a
rhetori c that cannot be precalculated or absolute. So: not rhetoric or math,
but rhetoric before math, which makes perfect sense if you think about how
we calculate values from insurance premiums and courtroom settlements to
fair wages and even the price of bread.
    How does Jane Austen norm Edward's mixed feelings with respect to
background actors and the realities constructed around him, and Elinor
for that matter? How would these implied human beings feel with respect
to their prospects and how should they be viewed? In the company of the
Dashwood wo men and Mrs. Jennings, Elinor's brother John Dashwood situ-
ates Edward's engagement to Lucy in terms of family loyalty: "Duty, affec-
tion, and everything [i.e., money) was disregarded. I never thought Edward
so stubborn, so unfeeling before" (200 ). In response, Mrs. Jennings resitu-
ates Edward's engagement in terms of loyalty to his word: "he has acted like
an honest man!" ( 201). John is astonished by this retort, but does not wish
to offend anybody of good fortune. So instead John notes the extraordinary
character of Edward's behavior in light of his mother's sudden preference for
brother Robert, a preference of the sort that John declares "every conscien-
tious, good mother, in like circumstances, would adopt" (201). Of course
by this point the reader knows that John is upwardly malleable, Edward's
mother cruel, and even the society matron Mrs. Jennings interested, though
her "sincere" reference point coincides with the story's end. In any case, the



  A
                                     B          '                          C p,1S-.,trl "a mctrl l ' 1 r,,
      "threw a chair at his         'helped an elderly woman
           classmate"                   with her groceries                                strt:·e•


  D
                                    E             t                        F                •' '
         had a root canal                   felt th e warr1                    {l '~' /i It f   I J ft      j, r I'


           performed"                        sunshine                                  1r1l r        ll l



FIGURE    4 . 5. ". .. lop-down affec1ivc information acquired 1hrough gossip influcnces ,·ision, so that
what we know al>ou1 someone innuenccs not only how we feel and think about 1hcm, but also whether or
not we sec them in the firs I place." (Image reproduced wilh permission from the American Associa1ion
for the Advancement of Science)
116                                                                  C H A PT E R !'O UR

 secondary characters play a crucial role in establishing what Kahneman calls
 the perceived abnormality of an event and its affective reference points: re-
 gret, horror, outrage, and so on. And this is not to mention the even more
 backgrounded, but no less important, reference values lodged rhetor ically
 beyond the passing judgment of secondary characters, in tertiary characters
 like Willoughby's othenvise obscure servant who appears out of nowhere to
 hold his horse's reins/~ in the places like Barton Cottage that may or m ay not
 afford happiness, in the legal arrangements and inheritance gu idelines that
 structure a novel around abnormalities and their local negotiation .35
     In 1792 Mary Wollstonecraft famously identifies the "equivocal h umiliat -
 ing situation" that sets women not unlike the Dashwoods on th eir journ ey:
 they are dependent on the benevolence of brother John, whose ma rriage sets
 them at odds legally and therefore emotionally. l t is worth q uoting Woll -
 stonecraft at some length because she provides a fitting conclusion to m y
 argument about how fictions help establish reality.

     Girls, who have been thus weakly educated, are often cruell y left by their par -
     ents without any provision; and, of course, are dependent on, not only the
     reason, but the bounty of their brothers. These brothers are, to view the fair -
     est side of the question, good sort of men, and give as a favour, what chil-
     dren of the same parents had an equal right to. In th is equivocal humil iating
    situation, a docile female may remain some time, with a tolerable degree of
    comfort. But, when the brother marries, a probable circumstance, from be-
    ing considered as the mistress of the family, she is viewed with averted looks
   as an intruder, an unnecessary burden on the benevolence of the master of
    the house, and his new partner. Who can recount the misery, which many
    unfortunate beings, whose minds and bodies are equally weak, suffer in such
   situations-unable to work and ashamed to beg? The wife, a cold -hearted,
   narrow-minded woman, and this is not an unfair supposit ion; for the pres-
   ent mode of education does not tend to enlarge the heart any more than the
   understanding, is jealous of the little kindness which her husband shows to his
   relations; and her sensibility not rising to humanity, she is displeased at seeing
   the property of her children lavished on an helpless sister. These are matters
   of fact, which have come under my eye again and again. The consequence is
   obvious, the wife has recourse to cunning to undermine the habitual affec-
   tion, which she is afraid openly to oppose....36

It is as if Wollstonecraft is describing the Dash wood situation exactly, but for
the gratuitous comment about poor education that turns out to be inconse-
quential. For Austen shows in detail how such profound vulnerability also
affects women who are relatively well-off in terms of such cultural capital,
as we now caJJ it. In fact the "tolerable degree of comfort" both authors at-
MI)( ED   F E I! I, IN G S   I N   A U ST I! N ' S   SE NSE   AN D   SENS I /l I I, IT Y   127

  tribute to some women depends upon the favor of men who might be quite
  good enough, that is until they marry. Exactly at that point-when the legal
  institution of marriage redistributes property rights to the disadvantage of a
  husband's immediate female relatives - sensibilities are redistributed as well,
  revealing the uncomfortable norm which hung in the background all along.
  Benevolence, which is the exclusive privilege of a house master, is under-
 mined by his wife. Shame, which is the disproportionate burden of sisters,
 becomes overwhelming. Meanwhile the equalizing sensibility that might rise
 to humanity remains abstract and practically irrelevant, because circum-
 stances won't allow.
      Wollstonecraft is critically devastating as she, like Austen, ties sensibility
 directly to circumstances that appear in this case recalcitrant. At the same
 time these circumstances reveal themselves as negotiable, ultimately, because
 they appear so petty and unfair. What might first appear as the unshakable
 virtues and vices of humani ty-benevolence and cold-heartedness-cannot
 be credited solely to the people in this story because they are the variables
 of patriarchy. But since these sentiments are so systematic, they can also be
 otherwise. We might even say that both Wollstonecraft and Austen are skilled
 negotiators as Kahneman might describe them, which is to say that they both
 show how reality is established with respect to its alternatives. Each author
 increases sympathy by showing how the victim's fate should not be consid-
 ered normal, each makes it easy to imagine alternatives to the unhappy situ-
 ation, and each carefully orchestrates who are focal individuals and who are
 background actors so that blame is removed from the suffering sisters and
 redistributed not to the would-be benevolent brothers, and not to the petty
wives who are just looking after their offspring, but rather to the occasions
that offer themselves all- too regularly. This is quite a trick, especially for a
novelist whose job it is to characterize and dramatize with people, not institu-
tions, at the focal point. Wollstonecraft can simply foreground institutional
culprits like law and education. But this is only half the story as any good
novelist knows. How does Austen pull it off?
     We can look for example at how Austen carefully focalizes the responsibil-
ity for suffering around John Dashwood's jealous wife. No doubt Mrs. John
Dashwood is indelicate when she abruptly shows up at her husband's newly
inherited house as it was still occupied by the Dashwood women. But no one
could dispute her "right to come" as the law speaks loudly at this moment.
No doubt Mrs. John Dashwood had already registered as a potential threat
to the Dashwood women. But the occasion to victimize had never presented
itself up to that point. As Wollstonecraft observes, a wife's cold-heartedness
and jealous behavior that undermines the habitual affection between a hus-
128                                                            C II A PT E R   PO U R

band and his sisters can't be attributed to bad character primarily, but only
secondarily. lt is the occasion that turns a wife from vaguely unfavorable to
downright destructive emotionally and otherwise. Austen puts it just this
way: "Mrs. John Dashwood had never been a favorite with any of her hus-
band's family; but she had had no opportunity, till the present, of shewing
them with how little attention to the comfort of other people she could act
when occasion required it" (5). That is to say the offending actions are quite
squarely the result of predictable opportunities, whereas character is beside
 the point. So even though the reader can take some pleasure in attributing
 motives good and bad to a variety of characters, Austen is wonderfully cau-
 tious about distributing responsibility so that character behavior appears cir-
 cumstantial, but not inevitable. Perhaps circumstances can be overcome by
 individuals with an extraordinary sensibility for humanity, as Wollstonecraft
 calls it, or what Austen considers uncommon feeling. But that is not the norm
 as represented, for example, by the mother in this situation. In "Mrs. Dash-
 wood's situation, with only common feelings," unpleasantness is to be ex-
 pected (5). In the hands of Wollstonecraft and Austen, virtuous sentiments
 appear regrettably abnormal; the norm is vicious.
     Of course Wollstonecraft did not know the Dash woods. T his insufferable
 "situation" is shared only because it resides stubbornly in the world, not in
 some mishmash of personal sentiments. And Wollstonecraft was right: it is
 precisely such an equivocal situation that demands analysis first because it
 indexes how realities are established, more or less painfully. 37
     In her Vindication, Wollstonecraft is writing critically in a disciplinary
 form we would now consider social science. But our social science is not
 solely responsible for the analysis and criticism of social norms. Referencing
 Kahneman primarily next to Barsalou and Barrett, I hope to have shown in
 this chapter how such a situation-and the mixed feelings it engenders -
 deserve a certain kind of rhetorical analysis that can, indeed must, cross dis-
 ciplines to do its work adequately. No single discipline has a monopoly on
 how norms are established referentially, and measured. At the same time we
 should see how rhetoric cannot be ancillary to knowledge in the disciplines,
the mere linguistic form into which content is poured. In an age where the
limits of rationality are newly interesting across disciplines, rhetoric is redis-
covered at their very heart.
                               EPILOGUE


                     Irreconcilable Differences?

                           With Stephanie Preston




 At least since the publication of C. P. Snow's Rede Lecture "The Two Cul-
 tures" in 1959, academics have worried about the divide between science
and the humanities: the former striving to maintain clean, consistent, re-
sults by controlling the environments in which phenomena are studied, and
the latter embracing natural complexities in the world, including culturally
specific frames of reference that shape any particular study. 1 What has been
the fate of human phenomena that - unlike particle physics or a poem re-
spectively- do not seem to fit comfortably into one culture or the other?
Emotion, for instance, is a fundamental human phenomenon that should be
available to laboratory study like anything else that transpires in our material
lives; at the same time, it seems defined by complexities that disappear in the
controlled environment of the laboratory. The affective or "emotional turn"2
across the disciplines has been shaped by this problem at least since the rise
of neuroimaging in the 1980s, with two typical responses.
    The first response to this two-cultures divide either assumes or asserts in-
commensurability, whereby two fields go about their business so differently
that they cannot be meaningfully compared to each other, despite the fact
that each might proceed rigorously according to field-specific expectations,
each might produce credible data, and each might use the same key terms.
An example: Neuroscience studies that examine empathy through the role of
mirror-neurons or automatic neural and physiological processes> seem in-
commensurable with empathy studies in professional histories, including the
work of Carolyn J. Dean (as discussed below). Where this kind of neurosci-
ence invokes a timeframe that includes the Pleistocene approximately 10,000
years ago, and even the evolution of mammalian brains hundreds of millions
130                                                                  EPILO GU E


of years ago, Dean ties the phenomenon of empathy to its 1873 appearance
 in the aesthetic/psychological vocabulary of German Ei11fii/1li111g, and tracks
 its much-discussed "exhaustion" after the Holocaust.4 lncommensurability
 finds a semantic-theoretical corollary in the emotion studies of Scarantino/
 Griffiths, who propose distinctions that would at least mitigate errors of
 equivocation. They argue for a clear distinction between two projects: what
 they call the "Folk Emotion Project" that investigates how people actually cat-
 egorize emotions, can be distinguished from the "Scientific Emotion Project"
 designated with subscripted versions of the relevant folk emotion categories
 (e.g., "anger 6 " ) that investigates how emotions should be categorized for sci-
 entific purposes. 5
      Deemed "consilience" by the biologist E. 0 . Wilson, a second influential
 response to the two-cultures divide has explicitly rejected incommensurabil-
 ity, arguing instead that we must be able to explain any human phenomenon
 in natural-scientific terms. Thus, according to Steven Pinker for instance, a
 novelistic emotion like romantic love in Jane Austen's Sense and Sensibility
 should be read in terms of evolutionary psychology that includes mating and
 sex differences, parent-offspring conflict, sibling rivalry, self-deception, ta-
 boo, coalitional psychology, and what he calls, following Robert Trivers, the
 "moral emotions," including sympathy, anger, gratitude, and guilt, which are
 supposed to modulate reciprocity in a manner compatible with reproductive
 success.6
      Instead of proposing a third response to the two -culture problem, we offer
 in this essay a critique that points to its dissolution in the study of emotion.
 First we explain in more detail how, since the early 1980s, emotion studies
 have been shaped by the two-cultures alternative. A key episode in this story
 is a concern with the "reverse inference" problem that renders causal argu-
 ments in neuroscience suspect, and hence discourages the explicit process of
 inferring meaning into research studies and results, thereby sidelining a hall-
 mark of the humanities and interpretive social sciences. Then, after reintro-
 ducing "situated cognition"-a recent approach to psychology and neuro-
science that is compatible with humanities and social science research - we
offer empathy as an important case study where laboratory, ethnographic,
and historical work are integrated to treat socio-emotional phenomena rigor-
ously.7 The history of science and emotion post-1945, we finally argue, cali-
brates to broadly ecological concerns, and specifically, to situated models of
cognition that have recently gained traction across the disciplines after a cri-
tique of the decontextualized brain.
 IRR!! C ON C ILAIII.E   Dll'l'EltEN C l'.S?                                     131



                   Limits of Laboratory Science of Emotion

  Where B. F. Skinner's psychology as an empirical behavioral science has
  been, at least since Noam C homsky's famous 1959 review, subject to criti-
  cism for failing to stud y people in their natural contexts, technical constraints
  of neuroscience have, of late, seemed to renew the abstraction problem in
  psychology. 8
     1) Technological limitations. Subsequent to technological advances in the
  neuroscience of th e mind that began in the early 1980s, the key tools em-
  ployed by human neuroscientists to study the brain have come to include
  functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), positron emissions tomog-
 raphy (PET), transcranial magnetic stimulation {TMS), and external brain
 recordings (e.g., EEG, ERP, MEG).9 By and large, these techniques require
 subjects to sit or lie completely still during the recording, inside of or at-
 tached to machines that are cumbersome and sometimes also loud (espe-
 cially fMRI, which is the most widely used). These logistical limitations make
 it very difficult to present subjects with naturalistic situations, scenarios, or
 decisions. For analytic purposes, typical stimuli must also consist of many re-
 peated trials of events that occupy no more than a few seconds each, delivered
 via visual slides or audio recordings, and that allow only simple finger move-
 ments as a relevant response. Some experimenters have devised creative ways
 to study more natural human behavior in these environments, for example
 by having subjects experience the soft touch of a partner or stranger to an
extended limb, 10 by showing or indicating the pain occurring to a loved one
just outside of the scanner, 11 or by presenting audio clips or images of one's
own baby versus a n unfamiliar one. 12 But most researchers who study deci-
sion making, emotion, and prosocial behavior (i.e., empathy and altruism)
have tried to solve the abstraction problem during brain scanning simply by
using money as the dependent measure for value (see limitation 2, below).
     Some think these types of technical limitations on neural recording will
diminish as devices allow for more ecological experimental protocols. For
example, near infrared spectroscopy and wireless electrodes would be less
unwieldy and would permit more natural movement and interaction dur-
ing the recording of neural signals. Currently, however, technologies that
allow for greater degrees of movement or indirect recording also sacrifice
the specificity of neural localization. For example, one can report with tech-
niques that measure brain activity from the surface that activation was in the
middle front part of the cortex rather than the lateral or posterior portion,
but you can not specify that it was in BA 44. (In 1909 Korbinian Broadmann
published a numbered labeling scheme for the brain that subdivided larger
132                                                                    E PI L O GUE

 regions into subregions based on their cytoarchitectural properties, i.e., cell
 types; this nomenclature is still widely used today. ) Moreover this kind of
 measuring device will only be able to access better a momentary ecology in-
 volving the intentional subject, but not the more durable affordances like so-
 cial stratification that render the environment more legible to history: an ex-
 ample from chapter 2 of this book is the " happy" situation of the then -slave
  Equiano.
      2) Money, and tl1e limitation of a utilitarian ass11111p tion. Money is con-
 sidered useful in this laboratory research because the decisions are consid-
 ered "incentivized" (meaning that subjects are expected to give m ore truthful
 answers if their own cash rewards are at stake for doing so ); m oreover, the
 dependent measure is discrete, and easy to manipulate and measure. For ex-
 ample, whether or not l value an object can be indexed by how much I am
 willing to pay for it; how much l care for you is indexed by how much of
  my money lam willing to give to you; and how much I dislike something is
  indexed by how much I will pay to avoid it. T his approach is problematic,
  however, because people do not actually value money linearly, 13 or the sam e
  way across individuals. 14 Even more problematic for cases like altruism and
 empathy, money is known to produce a mindset th at specifically limits one's
  prosocial motives. 15 Thus, the processes involved in making a prosocial deci-
 sion in the money-incentivized laboratory may not generalize to real-world
 situations and, therefore, should at least be augmented with ecological tasks
 that are performed outside of the brain scanner where the monetary deci-
 sions are particularly useful (e.g., helping someone pick up dropped papers
 or responding to a baby's cry) _l 6
      3) Professional journal impact factor. A researcher's ability to manage infer-
 ences is constrained by a few factors, including recent economic pressure to
 reach broader audiences and augment a journal's impact factor, which does
 not regularly distinguish between the quality and the quantity of citations to
 a paper. In order to reach a broad audience upon publication, or to garner
 media attention, researchers sometimes intentionally oversimplify while sac-
 rificing professional knowledge about the complexity and indeterminacy of
the system they study. For example, if you entitle your article something ac-
curate but detailed like, "The temporal-parietal junction (TPJ) appears to be
involved during theory of mind (ToM) processing, but maybe only because
the task requires tracking movement in space over time," you are unlikely to
inspire professional journal or New York Times editors. Instead, you can en-
title your article something more exciting and forceful, which the researcher
knows is also less accurate, such as, "Brain region found for the unique hu -
man ability to read minds." The exact same functional neuroimaging data
 IRRl!CON C II.J\OLE   DIPPERP.N C P.S?                                         133

  can be marshaled either way, but the more appealing claim can practically
  obscure the claim that is more accurate.
      4) Mass media atte11tio11. Increasingly, decisions about how much media
  attention a study will attract back- propagate to influence the decisions of aca-
 demic editors, granting agencies, and the researchers themselves. No doubt
  research grants are more often bestowed upon experienced and capable re-
 searchers of basic and applied science, but the ability to quickly publish the
 results in a journal or to garner supplementary personal funding (e.g., from
 speaking events and book contracts) is more dependent upon the ability to
 attract wide public attention, facilitated by simplicity and generalization that
 easily explains key problems of everyday experience such as how we feel, and
 how we act toward others. These biases seem particularly pronounced in the
 human social and decision sciences, which pique the interest of lay audiences,
 and may be responsible for increasing concerns about the validity and quality
 of research being published in these fields - evidenced by at least three recent
 data-fabrication scandals in those fields, particularly implicating researchers
 who are widely cited for th eir exciting but oversimplified claims.'7
     s) Localization. Lay readers are provided oversimplified explanations
 of the brain that ostensibly map small regions or circuits to very specific,
 disciplinary tasks. With terms like " the social brain," 18 "empathy circuit," 19
 and "self-related regions," 20 neuroscientists admittedly simplify the inner-
 workings of the brain and imply a straightforward mapping of tasks and
 functions to particular regions of the brain. However, such simplification is
 misleading because each brain region is adapted for particular functions-
such as tracking visual motion in space- which is presumably mobilized for
any task that requires that function including motor acts, person perception,
and imagining the deceptions of another. 21 Even single cells as early as the
visual cortex- a place where neural processing is thought to be highly struc-
tured and dependent upon the type of stimulus presented-show changes
in the types of information that they process depending upon the perceptual
context. 22 Thus, while any one task can show activation of a specific region in
the brain when compared to another task that is construed as the "control"
task, the precise level and pattern of activity will vary widely for similar pro-
cesses depending on the nature of the task, the type of stimuli and decision-
process used, and the nature of the control task. Moreover, because that same
neural region can be activated any time the related information process is
invoked, it can be engaged by a wide variety of tasks, across diverse fields and
phenomena. This complexity makes it all but irresponsible to ever infer that
a cell or neural region is "for" a specific psychological task, which is virtually
never the case.
134                                                                   EPILOG UE


     Beyond the appeal of manageable laboratory procedures, what is the prac-
 tical appeal of brain localization in this same historical period of roughly the
 past three decades? Here is one historico-political hypothesis. When for in-
 stance empathy, racial hatred, or a sense of self can be located in a particular
 brain region, then realistically or not, prospects for intervention are in some
 ways easier to imagine whether that means a therapeutic cure or, alterna-
 tively, resignation in the face of biology. At the same time, it can become
 harder to imagine social explanations and institutional responses that seem
 more difficult to implement and attributable to social welfare frameworks
 that lost much of their appeal in the Anglo-American 198os.23
     6) Tlie limits of professional expertise. While any one neural region can
 be involved in a wide variety of disciplinary psychological tasks, researchers
 themselves typically read and follow the research only within their ow n field.
 This exacerbates the inferential problem of associating regions with tasks, be-
 cause researchers are often unaware that their "pet" brain region is also spe-
 cifically implicated in relatively unrelated tasks studied in other field s, which
 in turn discourages more accurate and nuanced inferences about the func-
 tion of the region. For example, if you follow research only in social psychol-
 ogy, you would perhaps never realize that the angular gyrus, which social psy-
 chologists associate with one's self or body concept, is also construed as the
 arithmetic region in cognitive psychology. 24 Indeed, this single parcel of cor-
 tex is known variously as the arithmetic area,25 the metaphor area, 26 the "out
of body experience" area, 27 the cross-modal area for integrating visual and
spatial information with the body, 28 or the "self-relevant" area, depending on
the specialty and task of the researcher and the brain hemisphere being stud-
ied. Thereby cordoned off from relevant research in neighboring disciplines,
any particular research project lacks a perspective that could triangulate two
functions and propose a more general function for a particular brain area,
taking multiple types of tasks, and multiple research fields, into account.
    7) Reverse inference limitations. This problem of associating a direct map-
ping of task to neural function has created a backlash from the more meth-
odologically skilled cognitive neuroscientists against "reverse inference." 29
Reverse inference discourages the assumption that the cognitive process in-
volved in a prior study that activated a particular brain area is also responsible
for the activation of that region in a subsequent study. So, for example, the
following inference is discouraged in the professional neuroscientific litera-
ture: since the dosolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC ) is often associated with
the ability to manipulate information and to control the direction of one's
thoughts and efforts (i.e., "working memory" and "executive control," re-
spectively), one can infer that a social psychology task that also activated the
I R R EC O N C I L A II L E   D I F F E It E N C E S ?                         135

  DLPFC requires working memory and executive control. No doubt, a ban on
  reverse inference of this so rt is understandable in principle, because weak in-
  ferences have been common in the neuroimaging literature, as demonstrated
 above and by Poldrack himself. But, at the sa me time, such a ban enforced
 by editors and reviewers at prestigious journals forecloses any explicit con-
 sideration of the function of a brain area and why it was activated in the task
 at issue. Those who vocally oppose reverse inference, and the reviewers and
 editors that follow them, overlook the fa ct that interpretations based on ex-
 tensive prior data would actually be good sources of information, as long as
 the inferences were suffici ently broad and judicious and took into account
 relevant data from neighboring fields and unrelated tasks. Broadly sampling
 from the world of data on the angular gyrus, for example, would require re-
 searchers to show more creativity and accuracy when inferring the role of
 this region in both ari thmetic and self-reference phenomena, which could in
 turn tell us about the relationship between the embodied cognitive brain and
 psychological processes. T hus, by engaging in some responsible inference
 about the functio ns of a region, a researcher might actually be able to infer
 the underlying p rocesses t hat various tasks require, while generating causal
 argum ents about how a higher-order phenomenon-namely a "self" in this
case- is produced , thereby implicating as well the relevant humanities and
social scientific material.
     So what makes the reverse inference problem stick? One reason is tech-
nocratic: vocal opponents are often from the same fraction of the profession
who have access to the tools and expertise required to build empirical infer-
ences into the tasks. No one disagrees that it would be ideal to have condi-
tions built into the task that empirically confirm the source of a task-region
association. For example, in a typical Theory-of-Mind (ToM) task, the par-
ticipant must infer the beliefs of another person (e.g., "Sally") on the basis of
Sally's unique second-person perspective in space and time. Thus, while the
participant saw the experimenter move the cookies from the jar to the cup-
board, Sally was not in the room at the time and will assume that the cookies
are still in the jar. This inference requires the participant to track the move-
ment and perception of Sally independently from the cookies, and is broadly
referred to as "theory of mind." However, ToM tasks do not simply require
making inferences about Sally's mental state. They also logistically require
mentally tracking her movements in time and space relative to the cookies.
Thus, any brain activity associated with a ToM task could be due to purely
mental inferential processes (what most people assume), or it could be due to
the movement tracking that is required to make this inference but is not spe-
cific to ToM tasks. To avoid reverse inference, one could add a "functional lo-
 136                                                                  EPILOGUE

   calizer" to the scan, in which the participants perform an additional block of
   trials that require movement tracking but not mental state attribution, such
   as tracking the movement of a ball behind an opaque wall. 30 One can then
   subtract the neural activity associated with the non-social ball-tracking task
   from the activity in the ToM task to determine the extent to which regions
   activated by the ToM task (e.g., the tempera-parietal junction [TPJ ] or an-
   gular gyms) emanated from the perceptual-motor requirements of the task
   in a way that is not necessarily "mental." Practically, however, the methods
   for generating such data are more difficult to implement, require specialized
   skills during analysis that many social scientists do not possess, and add time
   to the scan itself, which can reduce the power of the key contrast and costs
   significantly more money (money that the researchers against reverse infer-
   ence are likely to have, but others will not).
       An additional problem with the tenet that all interpretations must be em-
   pirically backed by analyses is that sometimes the most interesting results
   from a study are those that were not anticipated, and so were not built into
   the design. For example, a recent study in the Preston laboratory found activ-
  ity in the insula associated with decision to acquire the most valuable goods. 31
  This was unexpected because the insula was hypothesized to be more active
  in the subjective and affective blocks when people chose or had to relinquish
 goods they really wanted. A review of the literature, however, confirmed that
  the insula is often activated during monetary cost-benefit decisions, perhaps
 either because the insula is part of the neural system for assessing value on
 the basis of internal and affective cues, or because of affective responses to the
 surprisingly high- or low-value items that sometimes appeared. 32 These alter-
native possibilities could not be parsed in the study because the blocked de-
sign did not permit analysis of individual trials ( e.g. , separating valuable and
cheap goods)-a design choice that is simple and statistically powerful, but
would not be utilized by the more cautious, sophisticated, and highly funded
researchers who vocally eschew reverse or logical inference. Therefore in this
case, the authors could only speculate about the few likely reasons that the
insula was active in the money condition. In fact the inference could be made
on the basis of extensive empirical evidence in various human studies that the
insula is involved in monetary decision tasks that are not overtly emotional.
The rules against making inferences about brain activity would require, how-
ever, that the author say almost nothing about this finding if they report it at
all, and a second study would have to be conducted to confirm the interesting
result from the first study, doubling the cost of a methodology that is already
exorbitantly expensive (at the time of writing, approximately $600 per sub-
ject. with an expected sample size of twenty to thirty participants per task,
 IRRE C ON C ILABLE   DIFFEREN C ES ?                                          137

 making it a minimum of $12,000 per experiment and usually over $100,000
due to the ancillary costs of hiring a trained full-time staff that run and ana-
lyze imaging studies).
    8) Technocratic hierarchy. This situation generates a sharp divide in which
the few highly funded and technically proficient labs that manage multiple
large federal grants and a large staff of personal secretaries, engineers, stat-
isticians, and physicists control and generate the vast majority of published
studies on the brain - these also happen to be the researchers who most of-
ten eschew the simpler techniques and logical inferences, which nonethe-
less can produce useable information that moves the field forward if done
responsibly.


                                 Fear Situated

 We have now outlined some important factors that have intensified the
 brain-abstraction problem along with the rise of neuroimaging over the last
 three decades, exacerbating a two-cultures problem in and around brain sci-
ence. During this same historical moment, however, a powerful alternative
has persisted in philosophy of mind that references Wittgenstein and Vygot-
sky, phenomenological traditions after Martin Heidegger, and the perceptual
ecology of American psychologist J. J. Gibson. Now we will consider how
this approach can meet the professional expectations both of neuroscience,
and of the humanities and interpretive social sciences. Case studies include
first "fear" as it has been treated in the Phelps and Barsalou laboratories, then
''empathy" as studied by Preston and colleagues. In both cases, the emotional
topics-fear and empathy-speak to pressing post-war social concerns: rac-
ism in the first instance, and humanitarianism in the second. Hence our cen-
tral historical claim: The topics of laboratory work on the emotional brain
coincide meaningfully with particular socio-historical concerns that show up
at the margins of experiment design and interpretation.l3
   In a widely cited 2000 article that appeared in the Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, New York University cognitive scientist Elizabeth A. Phelps and
her coJleagues used fMRI to examine the neural response of "White Ameri-
can" subjects who viewed images of African Americans and White Ameri-
cans.3~ Phelps and colleagues say that their study in social cognition was
motivated by the remarkable difference between, on the one hand, a steady
decline in self-reported racial prejudice, and, on the other hand, persistent
"unconscious" racial prejudice directed at Black people (729). One of two
primary goals in this study was to examine the neural correlates of responses
to racial groups, focusing on the amygdala because it appears to be involved
 138                                                                 EPILOG U I'.


   in emotional learning especially in relation to fear, memory, and evalua-
   tion (729). Using fMRI brain imaging technology, the Phelps group investi -
   gated correlations amongst scores on the Modern Racism Scale (commonly
   used to measure conscious, self-reported beliefs and attitudes toward Black
   Americans, 736), unconscious measures of startle response and bias, and
   fMRI-derived amygdala activity in White Americans responding to Black
   and \Vhite male faces with "neutral" expressions.
       In experiment 1, the faces presented belonged to individuals who were
   unfamiliar to the subjects. In experiment 2, the faces belonged to " famou s
   and positively regarded" Black and White individuals (730) including Arsenio
   Hall, Bill Cosby, Magic Johnson, Martin Luther King Jr., and Colin Powell on
   the one hand; Conan O'Brien, Tom Cruise, Larry Bird, John F. Kennedy, and
   Norman Schwarzkopf on the other (730, 736). Accord ing to Phelps, these
   two studies showed for the first time that members of Black and White social
  groups can "evoke differential amygdala activity" and that "this activity is re-
  lated to unconscious social evaluation" (734). In experiment 1, the strength of
  amygdala activation to Black-versus-White faces was correlated with the two
  unconscious measures of race evaluation, but not with the conscious expres-
  sion of racial attitudes from the self-report questionnaire. In experiment 2,
  these patterns were not reproduced when the faces observed belonged to fa-
 miliar and positively regarded Black and White individuals (734).
      Interestingly, Phelps et al. are cautious about making socio-historical in-
 ferences connecting the indirect measures and the brain data, while nonethe-
 less placing the data within a larger context implicated by the provocative
 topic itself. They qualify: "these data cannot speak to the issues of causality"
(734), but go on to posit that "both amygdala activation as well as behav-
ioral responses of race bias are reflections of social learning within a spe-
cific culture at a particular moment in the history of relations between social
groups. ... Unless one is socially isolated, it is not possible to avoid acquiring
evaluations of social groups, just as it is not possible to avoid learning other
types of general world knowledge" (734, our italics). So in one influential
study we get a two-cultures impasse in dramatic form.
     On the one hand it is suggested that the history of relations between Blacks
and Whites should count as a significant causal factor producing unconscious
racial bias in a particular subject, as measured in amygdala response corre-
lated with certain unconscious m easures. On the other hand, Phelps and her
colleagues insist that their data cannot speak to issues of causality. Produc-
tively this study comes right up to the brink of a two-cultures divide, then fal-
ters. What causes racialized fear? Phelps et al. gesture vaguely toward history,
but give us concretely only neuroscientific confirmation that such racialized
 IRRP. CO N C II.A0LE   Dll'Fl!REN CE S ?                                     139

  fear exists (despite a subject's explicit protests to the contrary). The problem
  with this disconnect between vague history and concrete neuroscientific data
  is that the protocol for connecting the two - let us call it a mediating field
  of socio-historical phenomenon -is not sufficiently articulated to shape the
  laboratory work and its interpretation.
      By drawing on critical race theory a nd rhetorical studies, we might say
  that the White, avowedly pro-Black subject who startles more quickly, and
  negatively associates more readily when presented with an unfamiliar Black
  face, belo ngs to a broader social phenomenon that must be analyzed at the
  historical level that exceeds any particular subject. The Phelps study gives
  us a subject who demonstrates particular responses coded as "racist," but to
 understand or even to initially identify those responses, the phenomenon
 (racism ) must have reference points beyond the brain physiology ultimately
 studied. Racism is not located primarily in the brain. It is located primar-
 ily in the racist institutions- like US race-based slavery and subsequent Jim
 Crow laws - that exceed any particular subject and can persist without any
 particular kind of incorporation or brain state. In this case, both sides of the
 equation are necessary for the study to matter. Without the physiology, no
 doubt, claims of declining racism might be overstated owing to the ideologi-
 cal prestige of anti- racist discourse. And without studies broadly conceived
 in the humanities, such physiological evidence could never show up because
 we would not know what we were looking for, or at least we wouldn't care. A
 more robust brain science of emotion- in this case racialized fear-would
 take seriously in design and interpretation the "history of race relations" in-
voked incidentally by Phelps.
      Scholars in the hum anities and interpretive social sciences might also be
 interested in how televisual and other sorts of mediation show up in experi-
ment 2, where faces belonging to "familiar and positively regarded" Black
and White individuals significantly mitigate the racism identified in experi-
ment 1. But instead of emphasizing like Phelps et al. the anti-racist implica-
tions of this finding, which would suggest that familiarity mitigates racism,
such scholars might underscore the socially mediated quality of each experi-
mental stage. This would include category selection ("Black" and "White,"
which are socio-historical categories not natural kinds), image selection
("Black" and "White" image attribution, which will vary significantly accord-
ing to the cultural situation of the laboratory and its experiment and might
look different in Brazil, for instance), and also the very concept of "famil-
iarity," which in this case has nothing to do with face-to-face encounters,
personal acquaintance, or family or communal relationships, and everything
to do with mediation as media that locates and dis-locates images according
                                                                      l!l'ILOGUE

  to complex regimes of publicity and capital of the sort studied thoroughly
  by media and rhetoric scholars. Hence one might question, for instance, the
  Phelps presentation of stimuli that equates a list of Black and White individ u-
  als whose faces are supposed to portray rough equivalents in degrees of fame,
  age, and achievement (733). Only a broader perspective can foreground the
  fact that, although Martin Luther King Jr. and John F. Kennedy might pro-
  vide facial images roughly equivalent within strict parameters defined by the
  experiment, fame and achievement and even longevity are unevenly distrib-
  uted across Black and White populations, which means at least that a famous
  and familiar Black face carried with it into the laboratory certain kinds of
  markedness, whereas the supposedly equivalent White face did not. To put
  this another way, Phelps may be correlating celebrity with unconscious racial
  attitudes, not face-to-face familiarity. Her study does not adequately specify
  "familiarity" so no meaningful analytic distinction can be drawn between the
   camiliarity of an Arsenio Hall face seen by a white subject only in the context
   )ftelevision and accompanying media, versus the familiarity, say, ofEquiano
  to his slave master Henry Pascal. In the context of racialized slave culture for
  instance, "familiarity" did not mitigate racism, which suggests that the term
  must be deployed with some more historical rigor if it is to be socially useful
 in this way suggested by Phelps. More broadly the social cognition study of
 racialized fear must be "situated" with greater rhetorical specificity if it is to
 produce results that speak to causality. When it comes to emotion studies, it
 would appear, both sides of the two-culture divide suffer the shortcomings of
 a shared phenomenon not treated as such.
      Referencing Wittgenstein on natural language, Lawrence Barsalou and
colleagues also study fear-as-concept, in the effort to critique and dissolve
aspects of the two-culture problem that face Phelps and others. In a sum-
mative essay, "Grounding Emotion in Situated Conceptualization" (2011),
Wilson-Mendenhall, Barsalou, and colleagues critique the "basic emotion"
approach made famous by Paul Ekman, which assumes that "emotions re-
flect inborn instinct, and that the mere presence of relevant external condi-
tions triggers evolved brain mechanisms in a stereotyped and obligatory way
(e.g., a snake triggers the fear circuit)" (1105). Barsalou and colleagues instead
assume that emotions are not fixed, discrete categories, but are rather con-
cepts that refer to entire situations, and thereby represent "settings, agents,
objects, actions, events, interoceptions, and mcntalizing" (1107). Thus the fear
of a runner who becomes lost on a wooden trail at dusk, for instance, differs
from the fear of someone unprepared to give an important presentation at
work. In this latter situated conceptualization, they explain, "a different set of
concepts represents the situation, including presentation, speaking, audience,
lltRE C ON C ILAIILE   Dll'PEREN C !!S?                                         141

  supervisor, and many others" (1108). In essence, their laboratory experiment
  explores this hypothesis that the basic emotion approach is wrong since, in
  fact, a situated conceptualization "produces the emotion" (u10). Or to put
  this another way, the situation in which an emotion concept is experienced
  shapes how the emotion is instantiated in the brain (1120). For example, the
  observation that social fear activated clusters in the left dorsolateral prefron-
  tal cortex and inferior frontal gyrus suggests that social fear, as opposed to
  physical fear, requires more executive control to cope with threatening social
 evaluations (1124).
      The situated emotion approach of Barsalou, Barrett,35 Campos,36 and
 others, does challenge the two-cultures problem by explicitly incorporat-
 ing language and audience considerations into experimental design, and
 into interpretation. However, Barsalou's modular, functionalizing focus on
 situated conceptualization is forced to rely upon elliptical figures ("and so
 forth," "and many others") to articulate a background that recedes indefi-
 nitely into what we would consider non-conceptual affordances located in
 the environment, including the social environment like Phelps's "history of
 race relations." Racialized fear, for example, is not just a concept that refers to
 an entire situation and thereby represents "settings, agents, objects, actions,
 events, interoceptions, and mentalizing." Racialized fear, our next theorists
 would argue, is actually built into a social situation that can affect people di-
 rectly, without requiring a persistent or pervasive conceptual representation.
      Instead of working exclusively in the laboratory, Paul Griffiths and Andrea
Scarantino track "emotions in the wild" as they try to shift theoretical focus
 to neglected phenomena such as anger in a marital quarrel or embarrass-
ment while delivering a song to an audience (438). Emotional content, they
argue, has a "fundamentally pragmatic dimension, in the sense that envi-
ronment is represented in terms of what it affords the emoter in the way of
skillful engagement with it" (441). In an effort to theorize cognition beyond
the brain, Griffiths and Scarantino consider the "active contribution of the
environment," such as confessionals in churches that enable certain kinds of
emotional performance that they call synchronic scaffolding after Vygotsky,
and the broader Catholic culture that supports the development of the ability
to engage in the emotions of confession, which they call diachronic scaffold-
ing (443). They also consider material factors, including "emotional capital,"
such as the emotional resources associated with having a specific social status,
gender, disability, etc. (444). But what would the science of emotion look
like if we genuinely tried to integrate laboratory, ethnographic, and historical
considerations?37 To address this question, we will conclude with an example
from the Preston Ecological Neuroscience Lab that specializes in studying
142                                                                  EPILOG U E

how empathy is instantiated in the body and brain. In doing so we try to
learn from, and advance, the emotion research of Phelps, Barrett, Barsalou,
Griffiths/Scarantino, and others toward the dissolution of a two-cultures
divide.


                               Empathy Situated

  \Vhat is empathy? Mirror-neuron research casts empathy as a non -cognitive
  and trans-primate phenomenon whereby observing an action (e.g., cup rais-
  ing) fires a significantly similar set of neurons in the observer as when they
  perform that same action. But isn't a rigorous treatment of the phenomenon
  "empathy" obligated to explain at least why certain actions elicit empathic re-
  sponses while others do not? Otherwise one risks a circular definition where
  empathy is everything that involves mirror-neuron activity, and all mirror-
  neuron activity is by definition empathic. To cite an obvious example, why
  does empathy appear in some suffering circumstances but not others, even
 when the objective conditions appear the same? At this point case studies
 become crucial.
     A series of studies by Preston, Hofelich, and colleagues involves videos
 of real hospital patients who are discussing their experience with serious or
 terminal illness.38 While all of these patients are hospitalized for very serious
 medical conditions, they vary widely in terms of the emotions they invoke
during the interview, from distraught crying throughout, to laconic resis-
tance to talk, to resilient sadness potentiated by affiliation. But it is not only
the patients who differ in terms of their emotional profile; observer reactions
also differ significantly. Some patient-observer combinations produce em-
pathy and the desire to help, others do not. The variance across observers is
particularly pronounced towards the most distraught patients on one side of
the spectrum, and the most reticent patients on the other. Preston and her
colleagues found that most observers in the study empathize with the former
and not the latter. But observers who are currently experiencing their own in-
tense negative affect due to depression report less sympathy for the distraught
patients-understood as empathy plus the desire to help-while those who
report that they often "take another's perspective" in daily life report greater
sympathy for the reticent patient who is less demonstrative but does appear
to have deep emotions and need.
    Why so? If empathy were a non-cognitive, automatic, and context-
insensitive phenomenon, wouldn't pain trigger pain, sadness trigger sadness,
and in a linear fashion that could make both empathy reports and sympa-
thetic behaviors more predictable over human subjects and situations? How
 lRRE C ON C I LA IJI.E   DIFFEREN CES?                                        143

  does one explain, for instance, the "reticence" factor that correlates in a com-
  plicated fashion with apathy and empathy?
      At this point we consider situational factors that include a high degree
  of historical specificity. Carolyn J. Dean carefully tracks how "reticence" be-
 came an important quality in the recent production of empathy, or compas-
 sion, in one crucial post-war emotional domain: Holocaust victimization. 39
 Her key point relevant to the Preston study is that-as a result of false victim
 controversies and the surrounding melodrama-reticence has become a key
 marker of authentic suffering and hence a minimum requirement for em-
 pathic or compassionate response in the case of survivor stories. However,
 Dean is careful to point out that, in this case and others, a situational formula
 is not forthcoming if we want to treat an emotional phenomenon accurately.
 Instead a range of humanistic and social scientific tools must be brought to
 bear if we want to understand with some accuracy how empathy does or does
 not function in an y particular case. " The preference for minimalist style in
 victim testimonies," Dean reminds us, " is but one component of a much
 broader discourse about the exemplary victim. Over and over, the presump-
 tive cultural demands of false victims (here defined by the dramatic contrast
 between them and the putatively 'extraordinary reticence' shown by many
survivors) trump any inquiry into how some victims are deemed more cred-
ible than others since we are presumed to know that 'real' survivors would
 by definition be reluctant to seek attention. Reticence thus distinguishes real
and false victims" (396) .
     So the larger point is not that the emotional reticence of Preston's hospital
patients and the emotional reticence of Dean's survivors are equivalent. At
least one significant difference is that across the Preston and Hofelich studies,
the distraught patients actually receive on average the most sympathy and
help - though they can also elicit strong negative responses from minorities
of the subjects. Presumably, their high and overt negative emotion is neces-
sary to know that they are in need, and deemed permissible since they are
currently experiencing the distress of illness or pending death. However, the
resilient patients who exhibit little distress and much more positive emotion
reliably receive the second most sympathy and the reticent the least-in con-
trast to a situation-insensitive supposition that reticence necessaril}' fosters
sympathy.
     More important, for us, is the general injunction to consider the relevant
emotional genres and styles, and the specific injunction to consider how a
research question about empathy is located in a particular historical and cul-
tural situation where we cannot take for granted the transparency of our key
term. For instance in the hospital study, it turns out that gender expectations
 144                                                                 EPILOG U E


play a key role in differentiating the extent to which people want to help the
distraught versus the resilient patients, even though all observers agree that
the former need more help. This hospital study thus cannot be gender-neutral
without distorting the apathy-empathy phenomenon of interest in the first
place. Meanwhile in the reception of a survivor's tale, anxiety of transmission
now becomes prominent as historians and their audiences worry about los-
ing the subjects of study. In both cases, but in different ways, any neurosci-
ence of empathy would have to take these historical considerations seriously
at the level of both ex-perimental design, and interpretation. At the same time,
a humanities perspective on the shared key term "reticence" invites a line of
inquiry that does not assume the link to be accidental, but instead tracks the
interference of suffering situations across particular case studies. Finally, with
Dean, we can point toward a humanities construction of dignity that lays
out broadly how victims-of systematic oppression or "natural" circum-
stances beyond one's control-are constituted, along with the agencies that
are supposed to respond. 40 At the very least, Preston's study suggests how it is
not necessarily impractical to consider history and situation when studying
empathy scientifically, and the hope is that such considerations enhance the
quality of the conclusions.


                          Summary and Conclusion

 We began this essay with a description of the two-cultures divide, in which
academics of natural science on one side, and the humanities and interpre-
tive social sciences on the other, appear to be at an impasse explained by
incommensurability, but addressed most obviously by consilience in the re-
ductive tradition of E. 0. Wilson. However, experiments-even within the
context of neuroscience, which is focused on the underlying mechanisms for
behavior-can proceed more ecologically and thereby provide new insight
into brain-body-world dynamics, especially as they are implicated in impor-
tant social phenomena.
    Significant barriers remain. Scientists must come up with experimental
protocols that are ecological, situated, and statistically powerful, within the
confines of existing technology. At the same time, those of us in the humani-
ties must avoid the all-or-none proposition that their topics-for example,
racial hatred, empathy, or the self-must be completely available to experi-
mental protocol, or completely unavailable. Because of the nature of the
experiment, which holds most things constant in order to be able to make
causal claims about the role of the key variable of interest, one usually cannot
study many, possibly competing and interacting variables at the same time.
IRRl! C ON C IL A III.E   DIFr-EREN Cl! S?                                145

Thus, for example, to address our critique of Phelps and colleagues would
take dozens of studies instead of just the one, which was already suitable for
publication in the flagship journal for the cognitive neurosciences.41
    We hope that this essay, written by a rhetorician and a )leuroscientist,
can serve as an example of two-cultures collaboration at its early stages. In
situated cognition we identify an approach that invites such collaboration.
Given scientific concerns, it would be misleading to study "cognition" with-
out considering work in neuroscience. At the same time science cannot have
the last word without incorporating some of the situational concerns of the
humanities, because "situations" are environmental, including a social envi-
ronment that can be quite specific like empathy exhaustion, and temporal,
which sometimes means historical in the precise, professional sense of the
word.42 Ultimately the two-cultures divide dissolves when shared phenom-
ena like human emotions are treated with the methodological diversity and
cross-disciplinary conversation their complexity deserves.
                                          Notes




                                        Introduction
     1. C. D. Wilson-Mendenhall, L. F. Barrett, W. K. Simmons, and L. W. Barsalou, "Grounding

Emotion in Situated Conceptualization," Neu ropsychologia 49, no. 5 (2011): 1105-1127, at 1110.
    2. Jane Austen, James Kinsley, and Deirdre Shauna Lynch, Persuasion (Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2004 ), 198.
    3. Lauren Berlant, Cmel Optimism (Durham: Duke University Press, 2011), 5.
    4. Along with Chandler (cited next), some key relevant works on sentimental literature
include Graham J. Barker- Benfield, The Culture of Sensibility: Sex and Society in Eighteenth-
Cent11ry Brirain (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996); Markman Ellis, The Politia of
Se11Sibility: Race, Get1der and Commerce in the Set1time11tal Novel (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2004); and Lynn Festa, Sentimental Figures ofEmpire in Eighteenth-Century Britain
and France (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2006).
    5, James Chandler, An Archaeology of Sympathy: The Sentimental Mode in Literature and
Cinema (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013).
    6. In Blake's Agitation: Criticism and the Emotions (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 2013), 12-13, Steven Goldsmith cites Chandler as he describes this microscopic process
with regard to Blake.

   Exposing the scaffolding beneath its illusion of spontaneity, Blake allows us to glimpse
   that sentiment is "made," and he can do this only by "unmaking" it from within, by
   exploiting the loose joints of its grammatical construction. Tracking this interior pro-
   cess involves Chandler in a microscopic analysis of representative lyrics from Songs of
   l1111oce11ce and of Experience, for the kinds of abrasions that "denaturalize sentiments"
   turn on the disjunctions of single words or phrases. Consider, for instance, the word
   "tender" in a line from 'The Shepherd": "And he hears the ewes tender reply." Without
   the expected apostrophe in "ewes," as Chandler notes shrewdly, "'tender' becomes an
   economic verb rather than a sentimental adjective." By inviting this small grammati-
   cal ambiguity, Blake not only emphasizes "the madeness of the sentiments" but also
   directs our attention to sentimentalism's underlying economic function-to smooth
   the social transactions necessary to make commerce seem natural.

   - Citing James Chandler, "Blake and the Syntax of Sentiment: An Essay on 'Slaking'
                                                                      NOTES TO         PAGES     4-12

     Understanding," in Blake, Nario11 a11d Empin•, ed. Steve Clark and David Worrall {Bas-
     ingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006).

       7. Paul Griffiths and Andrea Scarantino, "Emotions in 1hc Wild," in Tl, e Ct1111bridgc Ha11d-
  book ofSi11mce,I Cognirio11, ed. Philip Robbins and Mural Aydc<lc (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
 vcrsi ty Press, 2009).
       8. Clifford Geertz, The l111nprerario11 of Cu/cures: Selecred Essays (New York: Basic, 1973), 30.
       9. Sarah Fielding and Peter Sabor, T/1e A,11-emurcs of David Simple: Co11rai11i11g a11 Acco1111r
  of His Travels Through the Cities of Lo11do11 and Westminster, in rhc Search of a Real Frie111/; And,
  the Adve11111rcs of D,,,,jd Simple, Volume the Lasr: i11 Wl1ic/1 His History ls Co11d11ded ( Lexington:
  University Press of Kcntud.1 ·, 1998).
       10. See for instance Steven Pinker, "Toward a Consilient Study of Literature," in Pl,ilosophy

  and Literature 31, no. 1 (2007): 161- 177; reviewing Jonalhan Gottschall and David Sloan Wilson,
  eds., The Literary Animal: Evolution a11d the Nature of Narrative (Evanston, IL: Northwestern
  Universit)' Press, 2005).
       11. Lawrence Stone, The Family, Sex and Marriage in England 150 0 - 1800 (New York:

  Harper & Rowe, 1977), 282.
       12. See for instance the book review by Alan Macfarlane in Hi.story and Theory: Studies in the

  P/1ilosopl1y of History 18, no. I (1979): 103-126.
       13. William M. Reddy, The Making of Romantic Love: Longing and Sexualiry in Europe, So111l1
  Asia & Japan, 900-1200 CE (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012). Eigh teenth-century
  European sentimental literature, notably Samuel Richardson's Pamela, marks for Redd y "a re-
  -hinking of the relationship between love and social rank" (380).
       14. Laurence Sterne, A Senrimelltal Journey rhrougli France and lraly by Mr. Yorick with Tl,c
   oumal ro Eliza and A Policical Romance, ed. with an introduction and notes by Ian Jack (Oxford:
 Oxford University Press, 1968), 18 -19. Compare Walter Shandy's polemical point in the Toby-
 Wadman affair. "love, you see, is not so much a SENTIMENT as a SITUATION, into which a
 man enters, as my brother Toby would do, into a corps-no matter whether he loves the service
 or no-being once in it- he acts as if he did; and takes every step to shew himself a man of
 prowesse." Laurence Steme and Ian C. Ross, The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentle-
 ma11 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009) , 475.
      15. Perhaps like Thomas Reid, whose An Inquiry Jnto the Human Mind 011 rl,e Principles of
 Commo11 Sense was just published in 1764 and has plenty to say about the intervention of judg-
ment upon that which is perceived directly. Reid's "direct perception," incidentally, will have
some influence upon the perceptual psychologis1 J. ). Gibson, who starts to appear prominently
in chapter 3 of my project.
     16. Sianne Ngai, Ugly Feelings (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2005), 81- 82.
     17. Amongst other places "prosthetic emotion" is discussed in Susan Miller, Trust i11 Texts: A
Different History of Rhetoric (Carbondale; Southern Illinois University Press, 2008), 14, referenc-
ing Cynthia Haynes, "pathos@play.prosthetic.emotion," in Works and Days 13, no . 1-2 (1995):
261-276. Jam also indebted to Libby Catchings's dissertation work on this topic.
     18. Philip Fisher, The Vehement Passions (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2002), 142.
     19. See especially Robert B. Zajonc's influential article, "Feeling and Thinking: Preferences
Need No Inferences," American Psychologist 35, no. 2 (1980): 151-175.
      20. Ruth Leys, "'11,e Turn to Affect: A Critique," Critical Inquiry 37, no. 3 (2011) : 434-472,
at 437.
      21. Brian M3$sumi, "The Autonomy of Affect," Cultural Critique 31 (1995); 83-109. See
 NOTl!S TO PAGES           12-15                                                                   149

 also Parable; for the Vir111nl: Movement, Affect, Sensntion (Durham: Duke University Press,
 2002).

     22. Lauren Bcrlant, "Nearly Utopian, Nearly Normal: Post-Fordist Affect in Ln Promesseand
 Rosetta," P11/Jlic C11/t11re 19, no. 2 (2007): 273- 301.
     23. Raymond Williams, The Long Revolution (Ontario: Broadview Press, 2001 [19611), 321.
     24. Jordanna Bailkin highlights how decolonization and the expansion of the postwar wel-
fare state inaugurated new emotional ties that sought to bind together young elites in Britain
with those in the former colonies, thus creating new types of social bonds now understood
within an evolving international human rights framework. She shows how the rise of the welfare
state in some sense transformed all Britons for the first time into both givers and receivers of
aid, and how a postwar regime of democrati2.ed and universal well-being was in part established
on the uneven terrain of decolonization. See Frank Biess and Daniel M. Gross, eds., Science
n11d E111 otio11 nfter i 945: A Trn11sntlan1ic Perspective (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2014),
 278-299.
    25. There arc some exceptions to this mystification-for example, Fredric Jameson on a
Paris fish market in Zola. The A ntinomies of Realism (London: Verso, 2013), 53-54. But this
convincing read comes after Jameson offers a systematically contrasting table in the spirit of
Massumi: EMOTION on one side as system, nomenclature, representation, etc., and AFFECT
on the other side as chromaticism , bodily sensation, sense-data, etc. (44).
    26. Kent Puckett, Bad Form : Social Mistakes in the Ni11etee11th-Cent111y Novel (Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press, 2008), 11, 53-59.
    27. Especially David Chalmers, forward to Andy Clark, Supersizing the Mind: Embodiment,
Action, nru/ Cognitive Extension (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008); Michael Wheeler,
Reco11stmcti11g th e Cog11itive World: The Next Step (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005); Evan
Thompson, Mi11d i11 Life: Biology, Phenomenology, mrd tire Sciences of Mind (Cambridge, MA:
Belknap, 2007) .
    28. Jakob von UexkuU, A Foray into tire Worlds of Animals and H11ma11s, trans. foseph D.
O'Neil, introduction by Dorion Sagan (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2010
[1934]), 172,
       29. Michel Se rres, The Natural Contract, trans. Elizabeth MacArthur and \A.'illiam Paulson
 (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1995), 33, offers a different critique: "forget the word
 e11viro11111e111" (emphasis author's). " It assumes," he writes, "that we humans are at the center
 of a system of nature. This idea recalls a bygone era, when the Earth ... reflected our narcis-
sism, the humanism that makes of us the exact midpoint or excellent culmination of all things."
 Quoted in object-oriented literary study: Julian Yates, Error, Misuse, Failure: Object Lessons from
 the Et1glis/1 Renaissance (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2003), 1. The literature on
object-oriented philosophy a la Serres, Latour, Harman, or Bennett grows quickly. In rhetorical
studies per se, see especially Thomas Rickert, A111bie111 Rlretoric Tire Att1111e111ent of Rhetorical
 Being (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2013).
      JO. Sigmund Freud, Das Unbehagen in der K11/t11r("The Uneasiness in Culture") translated
traditionally as Civilization a11d Its Discontents via James Strachey, The S111111/ard Edition of tl,e
Complete Psyc/rological Works of Sig1111111d Freud, Vol. 21, 1927-1931 (New York: Norton, 1961):
"With every tool man is perfecting his own organs, whether motor or sensory, or is removing
the limits to their functioning . . .. Writing was in its origin the voice of an absent person; and
the dwelling-house was a substitute for the mother's womb, the first lodging, for which in all
likelihood man still longs, and in which he was safe and felt at ease" (,u). David Simpson, in his
 150                                                               NOTES TO         PAGES     16 - 20

 book Sittwted11css: or, Why W,• Kct'p Sayi11g Whae We 're Co111i11g From ( Durh,1m: Duke Univer-
 sity Press, 2002), provides a genealogy for this popular phenomeno n as it runs th rough social
 scien,e disciplines of the Enlightenment; his book is about "how people have tried and still try
 to set limits, to make claims, and to find comfort" (4 ).
      31. But in "The Situation as a Function of Human Needs" from W /,at Computers Still Ca,1'1
 Do: A Critique of Artificial Reaso11 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992 / 1972]), 272 - 280, Dreyfu s
 argues that human beings do not "arbitrarily adopt values which are im posed by their environ-
 ment~ (277) . His first example is a man who falls in love with a particular woman and thus
 becomes the son of person that needs that specific relationship and must view h imself as havi ng
 lacked and needed this relationship all along. " In such a creative discovery," explains Dreyfus,
 "the world reveals a new order of significance which is neither simply discovered nor arb itra rily
 chosen" ( 277). Here Dreyfus references Soren Kierkegaard on the leap of existence where one's
 personality or self is redefined and "everything in a person's world gets a new level of meaning"
 (277 ). Indeed such a change, by modifying a person's concerns, "changes the whole field of in-
 terest in terms of which everything gets its significance" (277). Dreyfus also references Thomas
 Kuhn on revolutions at the conceptual level, and he might well have referenced Merleau-Ponty
 on political re,·olution as I will in chapter 2.
      32. Franco Moretti, The Bourgeois: Between History• and Litemlure (New York: Verso,
 2013 ), 45.
        33. In fact Ahmed provides a beautiful study of philosophy and the concealmen t of domestic
  labor as she tells the story of phenomenologist Edmund Husserl and h is \Wiling desk supported
  by his wife in the other room preparing supper and the like. See Queer Phenomenology: Orimta-
  tio1ts, Objects, Others (Durham: Duke University Press, 2006), 28 - 30 .
       34. Recently Jonathan Kramnick has brought our attention to Loc ke's feeling o f " uneasi-
 ness" which is a response to circumstances and counts in the order of causes that includes the
 mind "along with other parts of the world." See Jonathan Kramnick, " Uneasiness, o r Locke
 among Others," in Actions a11d Objects from Hobbes to Richardso11 (Stanford: Stanford Univer-
 sity Press, 2010), especially 158. As I am panicularly interested in the parts of the world where
social institutions distribute uneasiness along lines of power, I would instead highlight Locke on
"fantastical uneasiness": "The ordinary necessities of our lives, fill a great part of them with the
uneasiness of Hunger, Thirst, Heat, Cold, Weariness with labor, and Sleep iness in their constant
returns, etc. To which, if besides accidental harms, we add the fantastical 1111easiness (as it's after
Honour, Power, or Riches etc.) which acquir'd habits by Fashion, Example, and Education have
setled in us, and a thousand other irregular desires, which custom has made natural to us, we
shall find, that a very little pan of our life is so vacant from these ,measinesses, as to leave us free
to the attraction of the remoter absent good." John Locke, An Essay co11cerning Human Under-
standing (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1975), XXl.45; 261.
      35. Note how I will move between emotion and feeling based primarily on common expres-
sion and fixed phrases, while some of the technical and historical arguments distinguishing
emotion, feeling, affect, and passion appear in the footnotes only when necessary.
      36. Following a famous 1968 anicle by Lloyd Bitzer, the "rhe1orical situation" includes an
exigence (in terms of my project a basic discomfort), an audience, and a set of constraints 1hat are
part of the situation because they have the power to constrain decisions and actions needed to
modify the exigence: Bit1..er lists beliefs, attitudes, documents, facts, traditions, images, intcresls,
motives, and the like (8). Bit1-er's definition of the exigence is particularly relevant: "Any exigence
is an imperfection marked by urgency; it is a defect, an obstacle, something waiting 10 be done,
a thing which is other than it should be. In almost any sort of context, 1here will be numerous
 NOTES TO       PAGES     20 - 29                                                                 151

exigences, but not all arc elements of a rhetorical situation-not all arc rhetorical exigences."
Lloyd F. Bitzer, "The Rhetorical Situation," Plrilosopl,y nnd Rlietoric 1, no. 1 (1968): 1-14, at 6.
     37. Next lo Burke, I'm thus invoking Martin Heidegger and especially his 1924 lectures on
Aristollc's Rl1ctoric, where rhetori c is grounded in slightly more paranoid terms: lack of com-
posure [A11s-der-Fass1111g] brought on by terror forces us to decide who is with us and who is
against us, and then to articulate our concerns. In fact the reasoned outcomes of judicial and
deliberative rhetoric a re grounded in more basic rhetorical commitments shaping community
(Mitsein}, such as the cleavage of friend and enemy. Sec Martin Heidegger, Gr1111dbegriffe der
aristotelischen Plrilosopliie: Marburger Vorles1111g Sommer Semester 1924, Gesamtausgabe Vol. 18,
ed. Mark Michalski (Frankfurt a. M.: Klostermann, 2002), 261 .
    38. Kenneth Burke, Tlie Plrilosop/1y of Lirerary Form: Studies in Symbolic Action (Baton
Rouge: Louisiana Stale Un iversity Press, 1973 [1941]), 60 - 61.
    39. This analysis is indebted to Jami Bartlett, who has recently written the book on non refer-
ring terms, Object Lessom: The N ovel as a Tlreory of Reference (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press. 2016).
     40. Hence I offer an alternative to C handler 's work on mixed feelings in the line of Schiller,
whose treatise On Nai've and Sentimental Poetry (1795) focuses on the reflexivity of an emo-
tional experience as w hen Tristra m expresses remorse for pleasantries around poor Maria of
Moulines. Chandler ca lls this a " pe rformed ambivalence" (157), or after Schiller a mixture of
feelings (zwei screitenden Empfind11nge11, 153) that derives from the reflexivity of the generative
process (158 ). My analysis also not ices the reflexivity of mixed feelings as they compose charac-
ter and draw our an ention to the phenomenon , but I argue that the components of this mixture
derived from confl icts th at reside outside of the character, in a world that imposes a range of
emotional alternati ves appearing one way or another. In fact Chandler, following Ian Hacking,
comes close to this o bservation in his later discussion of sentimental probability as it plays out
in the Se111imerrtal Journey scene where La Fleur's three degrees of exclamation are analyzed:
Diable, Peste, then probably Nom de Dieu. " Fortune or misfortune acquires a kind of measure in
the marked levels of expressive exchange between agents. The assumption that 'accidents' move
us is elaborated by way of the conceit that in some 'casts' of the dice Fortune 'provokes' or calls
us forth .... Emotion can be thus closely keyed to degrees of improbability" (227).
     41. Daniel Kahneman and Dale Miller, " Norm Theory: Comparing Reality to Its Alterna-
tives," Psyc/rologica/ Review 93, no. 2 (1986}: 136 - 153.
     42. This is a piece that expands work we did together for the Frank Biess and Daniel M.
Gross edited volume Science mrd Emotion after 1945: A Transacla11tic Perspective (Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 2014).


                                          Chapter One

    1. Charles Darwin, The Expression of tire Emotiom i11 Man and Animnls (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1998 I18721), 139 - 140; hereafter abbreviated E. For reasons that will become
obvious, I cite the third edition throughout this chapter.
    2 . Alva Noc, Out of Our Heads: Why You Are Not Your Brain, a11d Otlier Lessons from cl1e
Biology of Consciousness (New York: Hill and Wang, 2009).
    J. Ian Backing's 1998 Times Literary S11pplemenc review is prescient; among other things
he notes how efforts in psychology to eliminate emotion as a natural class recalls the }-Oung
logical positivist A. ). Ayer eliminating metaphysics. Before the location of emotion in recent
advances in brain-imaging techniques, it seemed faculties of our rational animal (including
152                                                             NOTES T O       l'A GE S J 0 - ) 4

knowledge, perception, judgment) held out more promise for scientific study. Sec Ian Hacking,
UBy What Links Arc the Organs Excited?" Time5 l.irrrarr S11pplc111e111 no. 4972 (1998): 11- 12.
For an extended treatment of emotion and postw,u ra1ionalism sec Frank Bicss and Daniel M .
Gross, eds., Science and Emoriom after 1945: A Tmmatla11ric Perspective (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2014).
     4. See Paul Ekman, " How to Spot a Terrorist on the Fly," Wmhi11gto11 Post, Octobe r 29, 2 006,
www.washingtonpost.com J\vp-dyn /content /article /2006/ I0/27/AR2006I 027014 78.h tm l.
     5. For Ekman's blog on the show, see www.paulekman.com.
     6. The outstanding critical work on this topic is Sander L. Gilman, Seeing rlie /11sane (Lin-
coln: University of Nebraska Press, 1996 (19S2)). Among other things, Gilman tracks, through
 Darwin's correspondence with the psychiatric physician James C richton Browne, Da n vin's in-
 creasing skepticism about the utility of photographs expected to deliver stabk referents for the
 scientific studr of emotion, especially insofar as they might provide evidence for the insane and
 idiotic as the missing link to our emotional past.
      7. For a post-Danvinian history of faces in the psychology of emotion, see John McClain
 Watson, "From Interpretation to Identification: A Hislory of Fac ial Images in the Sciences of
 Emotion,~ History of the Human Scie11ces 17, no. 1 (February 2004): 29 -51.
      8. For de1ailed treatment of Dam-in's groundbreaking use of photography in the Expressio11,
 see Phillip Prodger, Danvi11's Camera: Art and Plwtography i11 the Theory of Ei•o/11tio11 (Oxford:
 O xford University Press, rno9). Prodger underscores Darwin's "rhetorical abilities'' (30), which
 extended to his incorporation of photographs in the Expressio11. Thou gh like Ekman we lend
 to read the history of photography retroactively, Prodger unde rscores how evidence and il -
 lustration are blurred in the Expression because there was essentially no precedent fo r the ac-
 ceptance of photography as scientific data. Like neighboring printed illustrations that recalled
 earlier physiognomic and expressivisl traditions (for example, Lavater and Le Brun respec-
 tively), photographs in the Expression "had to seem reasonable according to experience" (221)
 and therefore could be, implausibly, staged by an actor. So instead of building the case fo r 1heir
 uncontaminated conditions of production as we now m ight expect, Darwin instead focused
 his discussion of photography around the context of reception including his readers; a cano nic
 rhetorical concern.
      9. Ekman, ucommentaries," in E, p. 21.
      10. From the perspective of brain science, the current leading critique of Ekman has been
 developed by Lisa Feldman Barren and colleagues. See for instance Maria Gendron, Debi Rob-
 erson, Jacoba Marietta van der Vyver, and Lisa Feldman Barrett, "Perceptions of Emotion from
 Facial Expressions Are Not Culturally Universal: Evidence from a Remote C ulture," Emotion
 no. 14 (2014): 251-262.
      11. See Ralph Adolphs, Daniel Tranel, and Antonio R. Damasio, "The Human Amygdal.1

in Social Judgment," Nature 393, n o. 6684 (1998): 470- 474. These results are summarized in
Damasio, The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Makilig of Conscious11ess (New
York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 1999). For an extended critique of Damasio, see Daniel M.
Gross, The Secret History ofEmotion: From Aristotle's Rhetoric to Modem Brain Science (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2006), 21- 50.
     12. Damasio, The Feeling of What Happe11s, 66 -67.
     13. Along similar lines see Paolo Legrenzi and C. A. Umiha, Neuroma11ia: 0 11 tlie Limits
of Brain Science (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011); Nikolas S. Rose and Joelle M. Abi-
Rached, Neuro: The New Brain Sciences and tire Ma1iageme11l of tire Mi11d (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2013).
NOTES TO PAGE          34                                                                        153
     14. Candace B. Pert, Molewles ofEmorio11: Wiry You Feel tlze Way You Feel (New York: Simon
and Schuster, 1997).
     15. Jerome Kagan, What ls E111otio11? 1-lisrory, Measures, and Meanings (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2007), 23. Kagan's quarrel with the brain science of emotion in the tradition of
Damasio/Ekman highlights the irreducible relevance of personal expectation. Kagan cites, for
example, adults judging whether the facial expression of a male or female face was happy or fear-
ful took longer to decide whether a man's face was fearful because they did not expect to see pho-
los of fearful men (63). Also, like other brain slructures the amygdala serves many functions, so
when a scientist labels the amygdala's response to the u nexpected appearance of faces with fear-
ful expressions they must account for the response uncertainty created by the cognitive effort
needed to classify the face or to understand why it was presented (70 ). It is impossible to create
in the laboratory human emotions as they occur in "ecologically natural settings" summarizes
Kagan (81), and 1herefore we have good reason to doubt conclusions about the !alter that de-
pend on evidence produced in the former. For an excellent and generously footnoted review of
the Ekman controversy with special atte ntion to the critique of Ekman within the natural and
social scientific literature, see Ruth Leys, " How D id Fear Become a Scientific Object and What
Kind of Object Is It?" Rcpresentatio11s 110, no. 1 (Spring 2010): 66 - 104. A good summary article
on the Ekman critique and the emotional turn in historical research is William Reddy, Barbara
Rosenwein, and Peter Stearns, " The History of Emotions," interview by Jan Plamper, History
arrd Theory 49, no. 2 (May 2010): 237-265.
     16. The apt description of this book as " valedictorian" comes from an article on the positive
psychology moveme nt 1hat includes some of Kagan's Harvard colleagues. See Sue Halpern, "Are
You Happy?," a review of Tlze How of Happiness: A Scientific Approach to Getting the Life You
Wam by Sonja Lyu bomirsky; Happier: Leam tlze Secrets to Daily Joy and Lasting F11/fillment by
Tai Ben-Shahar; St11mbli11g 011 Happiness by Daniel Gilbert; Agai11st Happi11ess: In Praise of Mel-
a11cl10/y by Eric G. Wilson; and W/rar Is Emotion?: History, Measures, and Meani11gs by Kagan,
New York Review of Books, April 3, 2008, www.nybooks.com /articles /archives / 2008 /apr/03/are
-you-happy/.
     17. Paul Ekman, " Basic Emotions," in Handbook of Cog11itio11 and E111otiot1, ed. Tim Dal-
gleish and Mick J. Power (Chichester, U K: John Wiley and Sons, 1999), 46.
     18. Ekman , "Afterword: Universality of Emotional Expression? A Personal History of the
Dispute," in E, 392; emphasis added. In 1999 Ekman offered this revision: "I propose . . . the
following list of emotions: amusement, anger, contempt, contentment, disgust, embarrassment,
excitement, fear , guilt, pride in achievement, relief, sadness/distress, satisfaction, sensory plea-
sure, and shame. When it is remembered that each of these words denotes a family of related
emotions, then this list of 15 emotions is quite expanded. Clearly, it omits some affective phe-
nomena which others have considered to be emotions. Guilt is a likely candidate, and I have no
reason to make a guess one way or another." Paul Ekman, "Basic Emotions," 55.
     19. Although I focus on CAL, a similar project is underway in art history and criticism. See
especially David Freedberg, "Empathy, Motion, and Emotion," in Wie sich Gefii/1/e Ausdruck
verscha/fe11: Ernotio11e11 in Nahsic/1t, ed. Klaus Herding and Antjc Krause-Wahl (Taunusstein, DE:
Dreisen, 1007), 17-51, and Freedberg and Vittorio Gallese, "Motion, Emotion, and Empathy in
Esthetic Experience," Tre11ds i11 Cognitive Sciences 11, no. 5 (2007): 197-203. In Freed berg's work,
like in some of the CAL m~tcrial examined here, Darwin's complex understanding of emotional
situations is restricted by placing the Expression in the Ekman/Damasio trajectory along with
two other familiar touchpoints-primatologist Frans B. M. de Waal's work on bonobo empathy
and the recent discovery of mirror neurons. Freedberg can thus reach the unlikely conclusion
154                                                                NOTES TO        !'AG E S   35 -3 6

 that in Aby \\'arburg's Pa1l10sfon11el "the outward forms of movement in a work revealed the
 inner emotions of the figure concerned" (Freedberg. "Empathy, Motion, and Emo1 ion," 25). In
 fact the opposite is true: Warburg's Patlro${orme/ is about the "acccssor)' in motion" (/,cwegtcs
 Beiwerk), like the wind-hair draperies of Botticelli's Primavera, as a dynamic historica l fo rm ula.
 For a discussion of this latter view, see Georges Didi-Huberman, "The Imaginary Breeze: Re-
  marks on the Air of the Quattrocento," Jo11mal of Vimal C11/t11rc 2, no. J (2003 ): 275 - 289.
       20. Quoting Karen Sainchez-Eppler: June Howard, "What Is Sentimentality?" American
  Liternry· Historp1, no. 1 (Spring 1999): 63 - 81, at 64. The trendiness of CAL is cvidenl in Palricia
  Cohen, "The Next Big Thing in English: Knowing They Know That You Know," New York Times,
  March 31, 2010, C1, and readers' commenls published online as "Can 'Neuro Lit Cri1' Save the
  Humanities?" communil)'.nytimes.com /comments/ roomfordebate.blogs.nytimcs.com /20 I0/
  04/05/can-neuro-lit-crit-save-the-humanities/.
       21. See Mary Thomas Crane, Shakespeare's Brai11: Reading wit/1 Cognitive Theory ( Princeton:
  Princeton University Press, 2001), 4; hereafter abbreviated SB.
       22_ See Jane F. Thrailkill, Affecting Fictions: Mind, Body, a,,,/ Emotion i11 A merican Literary

  Realism (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2007), 250 .
       23. Suzanne Keen, Empatl,y a11d the Novel (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007), 27. See
  also G. Gabrielle Starr, Tire Ne11roscience of Aesthetic Experience (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
  2013).
       24- \\'hen Terence Cave writes about "literary affordances" -how to sit on a ch aise longue
  in Jonathan Franzen's novel TI1e Correctio11s (46)-he is onto something similar. In his compel-
  ling example, literature foregrounds in a particular way, and formalizes , an experience such that
  its status as fiction makes no difference phenomenologically (129). Like me, Cave is interested
  in how literature helps compose our environments (3). My reser vation abo ut Cave's approach
  can be anributed to the weight he places on cognition per se, as when he writes that "humans
  live in a cognitive ecology" (5). The statement is not untrue. But it unduly narrows the analytic
  frame like any other such not-untrue statement, such as "humans live in an emotional ecology,"
  or even "the planet is 71% water." In any case the ecology analyzed will then be predictably
  cognitive, or emotional, or watery, or what have you. That is to say after such a statement, one
 subsequently makes assumptions that are precisely at issue in terms of both the phe nome nol -
 ogy, and the rhetoric. See Terence Cave, Thinki11g with Literature: Toward a Cognitive Criticis111
 (Oxford: Oxford Universil)' Press, 2016).
       25. Jonathan Kramnick, "An Aesthetics and Ecology of Presence," E11ropea11 Roma11tic Re-
 view 26, no. 5 (2015): 315-327. Kram nick references Gibson and Noe in his reading of eighteenth-
 century local-descriptive poetry, and the fiction of Sterne. Kramnick's pursuit of the aesthetics
 of presence "with its emphasis on skilled action and its embrace of naivete" (315) contrasts in
 some ways the approach I pursue in this project. I consider some critical perspective figured
 in Sterne, Equiano, and Austen an essential part of the perceptual environments at issue in
 each case. Kramnick's book-length project is tentatively titled Paper Mi11ds: Literature and Some
 Problems of Consciousness.
      26. Though distinct from extended-mind philosophers who typically cite artificial intel-
ligence research, not linguistic research, practitioners of "cognitive rhetoric" drawing on the
work of Lakoff, Turner, et al. have produced some interesting lexical analyses ofliterature, and
a perspective in some ways sympathetic with mine insofar as it would endorse this passage from
Turner: "What can be recruited to mental work depends on social and cultural location. Paris of
the repertoire are common and can be assumed for any audience, while other parts arc special
     NOTES TO l'AGES 36 - 44                                                                           155

     lo special communities or special situations. Consequently, it is a basic principle of rhetorical
    theory that what works in one situation may not work in another. One of Aristotle's definitions
    of rhetoric is: " the mental ability to see the available means of persuasion i11 any particular sit11-
    ntio11." Mark Turner, " Toward the Founding of Cognitive Social Science," C/Jro11icle of Higher
    Etl11catio11, October 5, 2001, markturne r.org/checss.html. The foundational book is Turner,
    Reading Mimis: T/Je St11dy of English i11 t/Je Age of Cog11itive Science (Princeton: Princeton Uni-
    versity Press, 1991).
         27. Thr.1ilki ll , Ajfecti11g Fic1io11s, 51 and 53.
         28. Ibid., 15.
         29. Lauren 13erlant, " Introduction: Compassion (and Witholding)," in Compassio11: The
    Culture and Politics of a11 E11101io11, ed. Berlant (London: Routledge, 2004), J.
i        30. The patron saint of u niversal emotion, Adam Smith, gives us this charming formula-

I   tion: a sudden fall into disease may deserve sympathy, whereas being jilted by one's mistress or
    henpecked by one's wife doesn't. See Adam Smith, The Theory of Mom/ Se11time11ts (Amherst,
    NY: Prometheus, 2000 [1759 1), 59.
         31. Virgil, The Ae11eid, trans. Frederick Ahl (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007),
    2:223; 35.
           32. In 1767 Henri Fusseli translates Winckelmann on expression: "The last and most emi-
     nent characteristic of the Greek works is a noble simplicity and sedate grandeur in Gesture and
     Expression . .. .'Tis in the face o f Laocoon this soul shines with full lustre, not confined however
     to the face, amidst the most violen t sufferings. Pangs piercing every muscle, every labouring
     nerve; pangs which we almost feel ourselves, while we consider- not the face, nor the most ex-
     pressive parts- only the belly contracted by excruciating pains" (J. J. Winckelmann, Reflections
     011 the Painting and Swlpture of the Greeks, trans. Henri Fusseli [London, 1765], 30).

          33, Darwin's discussio n of artistic expression footnotes Lessing's Laoco611 (see E, 436n16). I
     thank William Schupbach of the Welkome Library for the History and Understanding of Medi-
    cine for notes on Laocoon a nd the history of pain.
          34- See Charles Bell, T /Je Anatomy and Philosophy of Expressio11 as Co1111ecred with the Fi11e
    Arts(London, 2006 (1844 1), 174 - 175.
          35- See note 19 above on Aby Warburg's Patltosformel and the skillfully given accessory.
          36. It is worth noting that the threatening snake has been considered the quintessential
    "emotionally compe tent object" in the tradition running from Descartes's The Passio11s of t/Je
    S011I through the brain science of LeDoux and Damasio.
          37. David Chalmers, Foreword to Andy Clark, Supersizi11g r/Je Mi11d: Embodimellt, Actio11,
    and Cog11itive Exte11sio11 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008), xiv. As well as works cited in
    the body of this chapter, see Michael Wheeler, Reco11str11cti11g tJie Cog11itive World: Tl,e Next Step
    (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005); Evan Thompson, Mi11d i11 Life: Biology, Plre110111e110/ogy, a11d
    tire Sciences ofMit1d (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2007); Douglas Robinson, Fcel-
    i11g Exte11ded: Sociology as £-.:tended Body-Beco111i11g-Mi11d (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2013);
    Giovanna Colombetti, Tl,e Feeling Body: Affective Scie11ce Meets tire E11active Mi11d (Cambridge,
    MA: MIT Press, 2014). To date, the most developed critique of the situated cognition movement
    and its varieties -embodied, embedded, extended-can be found in Frederick Adams and
    Kenneth Aiiawa, The B01111ds of Cog11itio11 (Malden, MA, 2008). For a negative review see Sven
    Walter and Miriam Kyselo, review of Tire B01111ds of Cog11itio11 by Adams and Aizawa, Erkem1t-
    11is 71 (September 2009): 277-281.
          38. Chalmers, Foreword, xiv.
•

                                                                    NOTES TO        PAGES     4 5-50

         39- Hubert L. Drerfus, "Why Heideggerian t\l Failed and How Fixing It Would Rcquirc
    Making It More Heideggaian," Arrificial Jmelligmcc 171, no. 18 (2007): 1137- 1160, at 1160, em-
    phasis original.
         40. For some related criticism see also Aileen Douglas, Uneasy Se11satio11s: Smolletr and rhe
    Body (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995), especially Chapter 2, '" Matters out of Place':
    TmveL< rhroi,.~/r Fm11ce ,111d Jraly. " Douglas writes about how "Dirt, in the Tmvc/s, is the mani-
    festation through which the narrator confronts his own sense of dislocation an<l bewilderment"
    (27); also "discomfort and unease" arc major themes in the Travels (28 ).
          41. A good summary can be found in Steven Pinker, " Toward a Consilien t Study of Litera-
    ture," Philosophy and Litemlllrc 31, no. 1 (2007): 162-178. In foct Pinker first uses cheesecake to
    talk about music, not the novel, in How rl,e Mi11d Works (New York: W.W. Norton, 1997), 524 -
    525. It is Joseph Carroll's review of Pinker's How the Mimi Works ( Philosopl1y and Lirerawre 22,
    no. l [1998]: 478-485 ) that draws this particular connection.
          42. Relevant here is Alenka Zupancic on situation comedy. Via Hegel and Lacan, she pro-
    ,;des a theory of comedy defined by situations run amok (impossible locations) vs. tragedy,
    which focuses on the experience of dislocation. Examples: the joke about the chicken think-
    ing you are a seed; Charlie Chaplin, Modem Times. This taxonomy would suggest, accurately I
    think, that Sterne exploits the tragicomic possibilities of dislocation . Alenka Zupancic, Tire Odd
    011e 111: On Comedy (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2008).
         ·43. Lisa Zunshine, Wiry We Read Fictio11: Theory of Mi11d a11d the Novel (Columbus: Ohio
    State University Press, 2006), 47.
          44. Terence Cave considers a privative like "leafless" to be a miniature instance of the rhe-
    torical figure praeteririo: "mentioning something while simultaneously saying you're not going
    to mention it" ( Thinking with Litemt11re, 90).
          45. Laurence R. Horn, A Nat11ral History of Negatio11 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
    1989). Cited edition is republished (Stanford: CSLI, 2001) . Analytically shared between Horn
    and Cave is affinity with the work of cognitive pragmatist and language philosopher Paul Grice.
          46. Jane Austen, James Kinsley, and Adela Pinch, Emma (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
    2003 ), 321.
          47. For a summary of the debate see Hubert L. Dreyfus, " Heidegger's Critique of the
     Husserl /Searle Account of Intentionality, n Social Research 60, no. 1 (1993): 17-38.
         48. Kenneth Burke, the rhetorician and literary critic, obse rved something similar about
    eighteenth-century bourgeois poetry of the sublime as it appeared from a perspective in the
    following century; see !he discussion in my introduction. Burke is making a point about how
    we must read the rhetoric of emotion historically. We must always ask who is attributing which
    emotions to whom-bracket sincerity- and what this act of attribution is supposed to ac-
    complish. In eighteenth-century sentimental literature, including some works of what Burke
    calls the poetry of the sublime, authorial attribution of emotion, e.g., the "man of feeling" (like
    Yorick) says little about Yorick's sincere emotions whatever that might mean, and quite a lot
    about the "discomfort" that would be addressed by this very attribution. One added virtue of
    Sterne's work is that he provides at the same time a kind of reflective meta-commentary that
    makes just this point.
         49. Joan Roughgarden, Evo/11tion's Rainbow: Diversity, Ge11der, and Sex11ality in Nat11re and
    People(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2009 [20041), 5.
        50. See ibid., 177.
        s1. See ibid., 311 .
        52. Prodgcr discusses at length the first of these images, best known as Ginx's Baby. Though
NOTl:S TO       PAGES     52-56                                                                      157
considered a technical tour de force because Rejlander had supposedly captured body and facial
muscles in vigorous movement, the picture was not a true photograph but a drawing made to
look like an original photograph. Among other thi ngs, Prodger discusses how, by adding details
like a large padded chair to support the crying baby, Rejlander's "corrections" convey "a tangible
moment in everyday life readers could mentally verify, and with which they could sympathize"
(Prodger, Danvi11's Camera, 125).


                                            C hapter Two
      1. Hereafter I will cite this Penguin Classics edition internally. Olaudah Equiano, The fo .

reresri11g Narrative a11d Other Writings, ed. with an introduction and notes by Vincent Carretta
(New York: Penguin, 2003), 77.
     2. Maurice Merleau -Ponty, Phe110111e11ology of Perceptio11, trans. Colin Smith (London:
Routledge, 1989 [19451), 136.
     3- Since 1995, Penguin Classics editor and Equiano biographer Vincent Carretta has made
a controversial claim that Equiano was in fact born in South Carolina, which would mean
that his accounts of life in Africa and of the Middle Passage are not eyewitness. A 2006 article
by Cathy N . Davidson summa ri zes the controversy up to that point as it focuses on two key
documents- a 1759 parish baptismal record and a 1773 ship muster-while providing a rebut-
tal that focuses on the unreliability of these two documents. She makes the case for Equiano's
basic credibility within the context of the Narrative's original publication. Cathy N. Davidson,
"Olaudah Equiano, Written by H imself," Novel 40, no. 1-2 (2006): 18-51. That I find Davidson's
argument persuasive is immaterial to my work in this chapter, which is about the rhetoric of
emotion.
     4- Orlando Patterson, Slavery a11d Social Death: A Comparative Study (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1985).
     5- Carretta, Introduction, xix; Henry Louis Gates Jr., Black lmagi11ario11 a11d rl,e Middle Pas-
sage (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999), 55.
     6. Emmanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reaso11, trans. Norman Kemp Smith (New York: Saint
Martin's, 1929), 138.
     7- The classic work on Du Bois and European idealism from Kant to Hegel is Paul Gilroy,
Tl,e Black Ar/antic: Modernity a11d D011ble Co11scio11mess (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1993) .
     8. Frantz Fa non, Black Ski 11, White Mask.s (New York: Grove Press, 2008 [1952) ).
     9- And where, according to Young, the lived body is a " unified idea of a physical body act-
ing and experiencing in a specific socio-cultural context; it is body-in-situation" (16). Feminine
bodily existence " stands in discontinuous unity with both itself and its surroundings" (38). Iris
Marion Young, 011 Female Body Experie11ce: "Tliroivi11g like a Girl" t111d Other Essays (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2005). A critique of the w,1ys in which Merleau-Ponty's model of sexu•
ality presumes a general or universal orientation toward the world is found in Judith Butler,
"Sexual Ideology and Phenomenological Description: A Feminist Critique of Merleau-Ponty's
Pl,~11ome11ology of Perceptio11," in The Tl1i11ki11g Muse: Fc111ir1is111 a11d Modem Frc11cl1 Pl1ilosop/1y,
ed. Jcffner Allen and Iris Marion Young (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1989), 85-100.
      10. Salamon writes about a young transman named Aidan: " his internal sense of discomfort
with his external appearance may not be a simple misalignment or mismatch, but an internal
sense of dysphoria that becomes amplified .is it circuits from his body to the gaze of an external
world that is brutally hostile to gender ambiguity lo become internalized and incorporated as a
                                                                     NOTES      TO    PAGES     56 - 5 8
 part of his gendered sense of self." Gayle Salamon, Assuming n Bod y: Trn11sgc11dcr n11tl Rlzcrorics
 of Matcrialitr (New York: Columbia University Press, 2010), 117. See also my following chapter 3
 on hostile environments.
       11. Fred Moten, " Knowkdg..: of Freedom," CR: N ew Ct'll te1111 inl Review 4 , no. 2 (2004 ): 269 -
 310, at 299. Moten's figure of the "consuming ship" appears nicely antithetical to a figu re of the
 ship-as-womb, a comfonable environment sustaining life amidst the waters.
       12. Hence my approach is close to Sara Ahmed's "queer phenomenology." Taking seriously
 the "orientation" in "sexual orientation," Ahmed de"elops in her book of the same name a beau-
 tiful rereading of the phenomenological tradition after Husserl. In the introduction she notes,
  for instance, how phenomenology " is full of queer mome nts; as moments of disorientation that
  Maurice Merleau-Ponty suggests in\'olve not only ' the intellectual experience of disorder, but
  the vital experience of giddiness and nausea, which is the awareness of our contingency, and the
  horror with which it fills us'" ( 4; 138 - 139 on a project that begins with disorientation). Ahmed,
  instead of accounting for how these moments are overcome as bodies become reoriented, wan ts
  to stay \'o;th such moments so we might "achieve a different orientation toward them ... find joy
  and excitement in the horror." Of course I'm not trying to find joy and excitement in Equiano's
  horror, but rather I'm tr,; ng to demonstrate how the literary human ities must be brought to
  bear in a case like this. See Sara Ahmed, Queer Pli e11omc110/ogy: O rienrntiom, Objects, Orl,ers
  ( Durham: Duke University Press, 2006).
       13. Cathy N. Davidson calls the most consistent trope structuring the plot of Tl,e lrztercst-
  ing Narrative "the existential rug-pull" ( 20), and she explains how this trope produces a hybrid
  form of narrative. "Given the inherent insecurity of being an African or of African desce nt in a
 world where black people are enslaved, watchfulness is a preconditio n of Equiano's existence.
 His is not a Moses-like journey from slavery to freedo m , b ut rather, an episodic and often anx-
 ious narrati\'e.... The hybrid forrn of The Interesting Narrative replicates the profound u ncer-
 tainty of the narrator. The text combines ( in unequal parts) slave narrative, sea yarn, military
 adventure, ethnographic reportage, historical fiction, travelogue, picaresque saga, sentimental
 novel, allegory, tall tale, pastoral origins myth, gothic romance, conversion tale, and abolitionist
 tract, \'oith different features coming to the fore at different times, and the mood vacillating ac-
 cordingly." Cathy N. Davidson, ~Olaudah Equiano, Written by Himself," 19.
      14. In Our Aesthetic Categories: Z-tmy, Cute, Interesting, Siannc Ngai spends time with Sterne
 before she n otes of the interesting: ~its desire to know reality by comparing one t hing with an-
other, or by lining up what one realizes one doesn't know against what one knows already" (6).
In contrast to this epistemic logic, my analysis of Equiano's Interesting Narrative draws out
a very different narrative logic not destined for realism, but rather a kind of an tirealism that
makes room for sacred moments in a patient narrative that must in fact reach some acceptable
level of plausibility. Political theology also distinguishes m y approach to this eighteenth -century
narrative material from recent work on queer temporality, which does have some similar ana-
lytic concerns. Notably Lee Edelman, No Future: Queer Tlieory and the D eatli Drive ( Durham:
Duke University Press, 2004); Judith Halberstam, In a Queer T im e and Place: Transgemler Bod-
ies, Subcultural Lives (New York: New York University Press, 2005); Elizabeth Freeman, Tir11e
Binds: Queer Temporalities, Queer Histories (Durham: Duke University Press, 2010).
      15. Daniel Kahneman and Dale T. Miller, "Norm Theory: Comparing Reality to Its Alterna-
tives," PsychologiCQ/ Rtview93, no. 2 (!986): 136 - 153, at 145. Emotional amplification is config-
ured by Kahneman within the new science of hedonic psychology.
      16. P. Brickman, R. Janoff-Bulman, and D. C...oates, ~Lottery Winners and Accident Victims:
Is Happiness Relative?" Journal ofPersonality and Social Psychologr3 6, no. 8 ( 1978): 91 7-927. The
 NOTES TO       PAGF.S     58- 65                                                                  159

  hedonic treadmill was introduced by Brickman and Campbell, "Hedonic Relativism in Planning
  thc Good Society," in Adaptio11-level Tl,eory: A Symposium, ed. M. 1-1. Apley (New York: Aca-
  demic, 1971 ), 287-302. Daniel Kahneman, Ed Diener, and Norbert Schwan, eds., Well-Bcitrg:
  Tl,e Fo1111dntio11s of /-lcdonic Psycl,o/ogy (New York: Sage, 1999) is the foundational 1999 text-
  book. In the first chapter of this book (13), Kahneman qualifies and frames this material on the
  hedonic treadm ill. Subseque nt in- text citations are from this book.
        17. A summary of the literature on psychological adaptation and the example of incar-
  ceration can he found in Shane Frederick and George Loewenstein, "Hedonic Adaptation," in
  Well-Being: Fow1tlatio11s of Hedonic Psycl,ology, ed. Daniel Kahneman, Ed Diener, and Norbert
 Schwarz (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1999), 311-312.
       18. Daniel Kahncman, Peter P. Wa kker, and Rakesh Sarin, " Back to Bentham? Explorations
  of Experienced Utility," Quarterly Joumal of Eco11omics 112, no. 2 (1996): 375 - 376.
       19. From the title of Dan Aricly's Predictably Irrational: Tire Hidden Forces T/11,t Slrapc 011r
  Decisions (New York: Harper Perennial, 2008). Another way to put this is hedonic psychologists
 are interested in the psychology of systematic errors, for example the systematic misprediction
 of one's own future feelings ("I can eat just one chip," " I will always love you"). Gregory Loe-
 wenstein and David Schkade, "Wouldn't It Be Nice? Predicting Future Feelings," in Well-Being,
 ed. Daniel Kahneman, Ed Diener, and Norbert Schwarz, 85-86.
       20. For an extensive historical treatment of this topic see Frank Biess and Daniel M. Gross,
eds., Science and Emotion after 1945: A Tra11sntla11tic Perspective (Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 2014); also Paul Erickson, Judy L. Klein, Lorraine Daston, Rebecca Lemov, Thomas
Sturm, and Michael D. Go rdin, How Reason Almost lost Its Mi11d: Tire Strange Career of Cold
 War Rntio11nlity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013); Barbara Maria Stafford, ed., Bridg-
 irrg tire Hr111rm1ities-Nc11roscie11ce Divide: A Field G11idc ro a New Meta-Field (Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 2011 ).
       21. Daniel Kahneman, Tlrinki11g, Fast and Slow (New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 2011)
is the post-Nobel mcgahit that made Kahneman a household name amongst intellectuals, and
 provides an updated account of cognitive science notably in the research trajectory of Joseph
LcDoux and colleagues. For a critique of LeDoux's brain science of emotion see Daniel M.
Gross, The Secret History of Emotion, chapter 1.
       22. The OED gives us "a little reminder of home, which may happily make you homesick."
       23. Arthur A. Stone, Saul S. Schiffman, a nd Martin W. DeVries, "Ecological Momentary As-
sessment," in Well-Being, ed. Daniel Kahneman, Ed Diener, and Norbert Schwarz, 28.
       24 , Alva Noe, Varieties of Prese,rce (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2012).
       25. Alva Noe in one of his interviews around the book 0111 of 011r Heads. Retrieved March 5,
2014. http://edge.org/convcrsation / life-is-the-way-the-animal-is-in-the-world. Similarly, Alva
Noe on experience: "Experience is not something that happens in us. It is something we do.
Experience itself [isl a kind of dance- a dynamic of involvement and engagement with the
world around us." Varieties of Presence (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2012), 130.
       26. Vincent Carretta, Eq11iano, tire Africa 11: Biogrnplry of 11 Self-Made Ma,r (Athens: Univer-
sity of Georgia Press, 2005), 98.
       27. This is a central problematic for Judith Butler. See especially her work on " passionate
attachments" in the introduction to Tire Psychic Life of Power: Theories ofS11bjec1ior1 (St:mford:
Stanford University Press, 1997). In this work Butler is interested in a scenario where the de-
sire for subjection is not simply "love of the shackles," but rather the desire to persist in one's
own being, as it is passionately attached to the power that subjects-hence ambivalence (27-
28). Equiano's passionate "attachment" to his master exemplifies this dynamic, I think, as it is
 160                                                                 NOTES TO        PAGES      6 5- 6 7
  structured by economic and not just political relations: Equiano's attachments are a function o f
  investment or lack thereof.
       28. For example, Hubert Dreyfus, "Intelligence without Rcpresentation - !vkrlcau-Ponty's
  Critique of Mental Representation," Pl1e11omc11ology ,wd the Cogrritivc Scicrrces 1, no. 4 ( 2002):
  367-383, at 378. "According to ~terlcau-Ponty, in absorbed, skillful coping, I don' t need a mental
  representat;on of my goal. Rather, acting is experienced as a steady flow of skillful acti vity in
  response to one's sense of the situation. Part of that experience is a sense that when one's situa-
  tion de,-:iates from some optimal body-environment relationship, one's activity takes one closer
  to that optimum and thereby relieves the ' tension' of the deviation. One does not necd to know,
  nor can one normally express, what that optimum is. One's body is simply solicited by the sit u-
  ation to get into equilibrium with it. As Merleau-Ponty puts it: ' Whether a system of motor or
  perceptual powers, our body is not an object for an "I think," it is a grouping of lived- th rough
  meanings which moves towards its equilibrium' (Merleau-Ponty 1962, 153)." An update of this
  discussion around pragmatic Merlcau-Ponty can be found in Donnchadh O'Conaill, "On Being
  Moth·ated," Phcrromenology arrd the Cognitive Scierzccs 12., no. 4 (2013): 579- 595.
       29. In Queer Phenomerrology Ahmed draws attention to the word "comfort." " The word
  'comfon' suggests well-being and satisfaction, but it also suggests an ease and a n easiness. Com-
  fon is about an encounter between more than one body, which is the prom ise of a 'sinking'
  feeling. To be comfortable is to be so at ease with one's environment that it is hard lo distinguish
  where one's body ends and the world begins. One fits, and in the active fitt ing, the surface of
  bodies disappear from view. White bodies are comfortable as ther in/rabit spaces that extend t/reir
  shap~. The bodies in spaces 'point' toward each other, as a 'point' that is not seen as it is also ' the
  point' from which we see. In other words, whiteness may function as a form of public comfort
  by allowing bodies to extend into spaces that have already taken their shape. Those spaces are lived
 as comfortable as they allow bodies to fit in; the services of social space are already impressed
 upon by the shape of such bodies" (134). So "you can feel the categories that you fail 10 inhabit:
 they are sources of discomfon, n explains Ahmed, while at the same time this failure is dynamic;
 "discomfon .. . allows things 10 maven (154).
      30. I use the Findlay translation ,v;th hypenext to his commentary and to the o rigi nal Ger-
man. as it appears in Hegel by Hypenext. http://www.marxists.org /reference /archive / hegel /
index.htm.
      31. At thi.s point Hegel has reemerged as relevant to the philosophy and science of mind, in
panicular the "extended mind" hypothesis. See instances in Anthony C risafi and Shaun Gal-
lagher, "Hegel and the Extended Mind," in Al & Society 25 , no. 1 ( 2010): 123- 129; and Doug-
las Robinson, Feeling Extended: Sociality as Extended Body-Becoming-Mind (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press. 2013). Hegel has the idea that "the mind is expressed in social institutions," and he
has "a clearly elaborated understanding of the situated embodiment of mind, of mind arising
out of the body's interactions Mth its environment" (35). They all cite Hegel's "philosophy of
mind" section of his Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences: "Human expression includes,
e.g., the upright figure in general, the formation especially of the hand, as the absolute tool, of
the mouth, laughter, weeping, etc., and the spiritual tone diffused over the whole, which al once
announces the physical body as the externality of a higher nature" (quoted in Robinson, 36-37).
     32.. Referencing Hegel's The System of Ethical Life, Robinson shows how the extended mind
of Andy Clark contrasts with Hegel's extended mind alienation : "extending mind to tools for
Hegel doesn't just help us think better-Clark's (2008) recurring refrain. It does that too, but it
abo blinds our thinking, makes it (and us) more tool-like" (42).
      33- Hence the Marx/Engels critique of Feuerbach: "Even the objects of lhe simplest 'sen-
 NOTE S TO      l'AG ES    67-7 0                                                                     161

suous certainty' [like the cherry tree! arc only given him through social demands, industry
and commercial intercourse." C ited in Ahmed, Queer Plret1omet1ology, 41. Like Lauren Berlant,
Ahmed also draws attention to the way in which objects are aspirational; we can have an "ob-
jective" (56). Those aspirations can feel, moreover, compulsory as in finding an appropriate
love object; we thus tend toward some objects and not others (85) while attributing volition to
oneself inaccurately.
     )4. Objects appear queer (retinal image inversion experiment). " Finding out how a normal
situation is restored amounts than to findin g out how the new image of the world and one's own
 body can cause the other 10 ' pale', or 'displace' it. It is noticeable that the normal situation is the
more successfully achieved in proportion as the subject is more active" (245,289).
     35. Merleau -Ponty is not jusc a Hegelian in the Marxist line of interpretation. Significant
for our purposes, for instance, is phenomenology that goes back to Heidegger, and then gets
 picked up by our philosophers interested in "the background of intentionality," i.e., the tacit or
what must be taken for gran ted, in order to make room for an intentional act like when I take a
room full of furniture as a whole, and deal with it by sitting down in a chair. Dreyfus points to
Heidegger and his work on practical, everyday orientation that makes action possible and being
there, Dasein, as such . Merleau -Ponty, in turn, writes about " the zone of not being in front of
which precise beings, figures and points can come to light" (100), suggesting the ways in which
noc bei11g has its own relational phenomenology beyond the Hegelian account of being negated.
The approach of Heidegger and Merleau- Ponty allows for ontological analysis of a hammer, for
instance, not available in such detail to Hegel, ,vho can treat the hammer only at more abstract
levels of thinghood.
     36. Michael Argyle, "Causes and Correlates of Happiness," in Well-Bei11g, ed. Daniel Kahne-
man, Ed Diener, and Norbert Schwarz, 370. "The main explanation for the lower happiness and
self-esteem of members of ethnic minorities is that they have lower incomes, less education, and
less skilled jobs. The effect of ethnicity when these have been controlled is quite small" (362).
     37- "The design or intention of the author is neither available nor desirable as a standard
for judging the success of a work of literary art." William K. Wimsatt and Monroe C. Beardsley,
"The Intentional Fallacy," Sewa11ee Review 54, no. 3 (1946): 468 - 488. Revised and republished
in Tire Verbal lco11: Swdies i11 tire Mea11i11g of Poetry (Lexington: University of Kentuclq• Press,
1954), 3- 18.
     38. Thanks to a note from Carretta, 24on36.
     39. Saidi ya V. Hartman, Scc11es of Subjectio11: Terror, Slavery, a11d Self-Making i11 Ni11etea11/r-
Ce11tury America (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997).
     40. " Positive emotions signify that life is going well, the persons goals are being met, and
resources are adequate (e.g., Cantor ct al., 1991; Carver & Scheier, 1998; Clore, Wyer, Dienes,
Gasper, & Isbell, 2001). In these circumstances, as Fredrickson (1998, 2001) has so lucidly de-
scribed, people are ideally situated to 'broaden and build.' In other words, because all is going
well, individuals can expand their resources and friendships; they can take the opportunity to
build their repertoire of skills for future use; or they can rest and relax to rebuild their energy
after expending high levels of effort. Fredrickson's model (Fredrickson, 2001) suggests that a
critical adaptive purpose of positive emotions is to help prepare the organism for future chal-
lenges." Sonja Lyubomirsky, Laura King, and Ed Diener, "The Benefits of Frequent Positive Af-
fect: Does Happiness Lead to Success?" Psycltological B1"/cti11131, no. 6 (2005): 803-855, at 804.
     41. Elsewhere Noe on bearing: "This is the key to our puzzle. What governs the character of
our experience-what makes experience the kind of experience it is-is not the neural activity
in our brains on its own; it is, rather, our ongoing dynamic relation to objects, a relation that, as
162                                                                 NOTES TO Pr\G£S             72 - 7 9
in this case, clc.irly depends on our neural responsiveness to changes in our relation to th ings. It
is there, in this extended, sensorimotor involvement with lhc world. 1ha1 we find the resources
to explain why we see when we use the tactile-,·isual sensory substitution system. My proposal,
specifically, is this: \\'e see with Bach-y-Ri1,1's system because the relationship that system sets up
and maintains between the perceiver and the objccl is, in ways that can be made precise, the sort
of relation that ,,·c bear to things when we sec them. \"/hat causes the effects for consciousness
of neural activity in the touch-dedicated parts of the brain to change? t\nswer: the world in o ur
 relation to it" ( 0111 of Our Heads, 59).
      42. A good introduction can be found in Jared Sexton, "The Social Life of Social Death:
 On Afro-Pessimism and Black Optimism," I11Tc11sio11s ]01m1a/ 5 (2011): 1- 47, at 28: " Nothing in
 afro-pessimism suggests that there is no black (social) life, only that black li fe is not social life in
 the universe formed by the codes of state and civil society, of ci1izen and subject, of natio n and
 culture, of people and place, of history and heritage, of all the th ings that colonial society has in
 common with the colonized, of all that capital has in common with labor- the modern world
 system. Black life is not lived in the world th.11 the world lives in, b ut it is lived u nderground, in
 outer space." Key figures also include Frank \Nilderson and Fred Moten.
      43. Vincent Carretta's note: Adapted from "The Spiritual Victo ry," No. 312 in Augustus
 Montague Toplady (!740 - 1778), Psalms a11d Hym11s for Public a,rd Private Worship. Collected
 (for the Most Parr), arid P11blished, by A11g11st Toplady (London, 1776).
      44. Mary Wollstonecraft, The Analytical Review Vol. 4 (London: Printed for J. Johnson,
 1789), 27-29.


                                            Chapter Three

      1. D. T. Max, "The Literary Danvinists,n New York Times, November 6, 2005. Also notably

 Denis Dutton and publicity around The Arr fosti11ct; positive reviews of Brian Boyd 's 011 the Ori-
 gin ofStories in New Scientist, Bosto11 Globe, etc. Terry Eagleton writes in Lo11do11 Review of Books
 September 24, 2009: "Brian Boyd's 011 the Origin ofStories . . . m ight well be a straw in the wind
 blowing contemporary criticism back from Culture to Nature." When it comes to the popula r-
ity of Cognitive Approaches to Literature, see for instance Patricia Cohen, " Next Big Thing in
English: Knowing They Know That You Know," Nl!lv York Times, March 31, 2010.
     2. Nussbaum's controversial "capability approach" to development, worked out initially
with Amartya Sen, unfolded next to her work on emotion, which is essentially neo-Stoic, with
updates and scientific scaffolding by way of appraisal theories and their foundations in the brain
science of Antonio Damasio and others. Elements of a cognitive approach to literature appear
in Nussbaum's Upheavals of Thoug/11: The Intelligence of Emotio11s (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2001). For social policy implications see Crea1i11g Capa bilities: The H11111a11 De-
velopment Approach (2011) and Political Emotions: Why Love Matters for Justice (2013), which
mobilizes the brain science of Joseph LeDoux and especially the primatology of Frans de Waal
on empathy and compassion. For Sen's rejection of a canonical list of essential capabilities a la
Nu.ssbaum, see "Human Rights and Capabilities," in the Journal of Human Develop111e111 6, no. 2
(2005): 151-166: "My own reluctance to join the search for such a canonical list arises partly
from my difficulty in seeing how the exact lists and weights would be chosen without appropri-
ate specification of the context of their use (which could vary), but also from a disinclination to
accept any substantive diminution of the domain of public reasoning" (157).
     3. Blakey Vermcule, "Critical Response VI: Wit and Poetry and Pope, or The Handicap
Principle," Crilical Inquiry !hereafter Cf] 38, no. 2 (2012): 427.
NOTES TO         PAGES      79- 9 3                                                                  163

      4. Lisa Zunshinc, ed ., lnrmd11ctio1r to Cognitive C11l111ral S111dics (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
 University Press, 20,0).
      5. Joseph Carroll, " Human Life History and Gene-Culture CoEvolution: An Emerging Para-
 digm," Evo f111io11ary Ueview: A rt, Science, Cult11re 2 (2ou): 23- 37, at 37.
      6. Lisa Zunshinc, ed., T/1e Oxford Ha11dbook of Cognitive Literary S111dies (Oxford: Oxford
 University Press, 2015), 2.
      7. Jerry Fodo r, "Against Darwinism," Mind & Language 23, no. 1 (2008): 1-24, al 23.
      8. Tire Fceli11g of What Happc11s, 125.
      9. In this way Zunshine's volume can begin with New Left literary critic Raymond Williams,
 who uses the term centrally in The Long Revo/11tio11; quoted in Zunshine, 6-7.
      10. Steven Pinker, "Toward a Consiiient Study of Literature," Philosophy and Lilcraturc 31,

 no. 1 (2007): 162- 178, here 176.
      11. Lisa Zunshine, illtrod11ction to C11l111ral Cog11i1ive S111dies, 62, quoting Spolsky, "Cognitive

 Literary Historicism," 168.
      12. James J. Gibson, The Ecological Approach to Vis11al Perception (New York: Psychology

 Press, 1986 I 1979 ]), 9.
      13. In practice, Zunshine's ToM seems less than a cognitive universal and more like the par-
 ticular way of reading discussed over the past decades by critics interested in how novel reading
calibrates a certain kind of bourgeois subjectivity where, amongst other things, psychological in -
 teriority is formally privatized, and where mind reading becomes newly important as an exercise
in market predictability. See for instance Deidre Shauna Lynch, Tire Economy of Character: Novels,
Market Cullllrc, and tire Business of Inner Meaning (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1998).
      14. Elaine Scarry, Dreaming by tire Book (New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1999).
      15. A controversial claim. For a different perspective, see for instance Garrett Stewart,
 Readi11g Voices: Literature a11d the Plwnotext (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990);
and mo re recently Sarah Gleeson- White, "Auditory Exposures: Faulkner, Eisenstein, and Film
Sound," PMLA 128, no. 1 ( 2013): 87-100.
      16. George Lakoff, Women, Fire, and Dangerous Tl1i11gs (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1987), 215-216. Here Lakoff refers to a passage like this from Gibson: "To sum up, the
characteristics of an environmental medium are that it affords respiration or breathing; it per•
mits locomo tion; it can be filled with illumination so as to permit vision; it allows detection
of vibrations a nd detection of diffusing emanations; it is homogenous; and finally, it has the
absolute axis of referen ce, up-and-down. All these offerings of nature, these possibilities o r op-
portunities, these affo rda11ces as I will call them, are invariant. They have been strikingly con·
stant throughout the whole evolution of animal life." Gibson, Tirc Ecological Approach, 14-15.
     17. Andrea Scarantino, "Affordances Explained," Philosophy of Science 70, no. 5 (2003):
949-961, at 950.
     18. Bitzer's definition: "Any exigence is an imperfection marked by urgency; it is a defect,
an obstacle, something waiting to be done, a thing which is other than it should be. In almost
any sort of context, there will be numerous exigences, but not all are clements of a rhetorical
situation-not aII are rhetorical exigences." Lloyd F. Bitzer, "The Rhetorical Situation," Plii-
losoplry mid Rhetoric 1, no. 1 (1968): 1-14, at 6.
     19. Before Bitzer on constraints, Kenneth Burke in the 1930s wrote about "recalcitrances"
that set propositional thought against assumptive backgrounds including structures of prohibi-
tion, impossibility, and resistance in the real world. So for example " I am a bird" must appear as
a poetic expression because it defies at the very least physical laws. Kenneth Burke, Pem1anence
am/ Change: A11 Anatomy of Purpose, 3rd ed. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984),
                                                                  NOTES TO f>A G ES 95 - 101

 255. For a good summary artidc see Lawrence J. Prdli, Floyd D. Anderson, and Matthc,v T.
 Althouse, "Kenneth Burke on Recalcitrance," Rhetoric Socierr Quarterly 41 , no. 2 (2011): 97- 124.
      20. S. KitayJma, B. Mesquita, and M. Karasa,va, "Cultural Affordances and Emotional Ex-
 perience: Socially Engaging and Disengaging Emotions in Japan and the United States," Journal
 of Pcmmalit)' a11d Social Psychology 91, no. 5 (2006 ): 890-903.
      21. Lawrence Kaufman and Fabricc Clement, " How C ulture Comes to Mind: From Social
 Affordances to Cultural Analogies," l11tellccrirn 2 - 3, no. 46/47 ( 2007): 221-250 .
      22. See also Nico II. Frijda, Tlie Emorio11s (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986),
 189-190: " Roughly speaking, emotional cxperience corresponds to a motive appear.ince involv-
 ing 'demand characteristics' (Lewin 1937). Demand characteristics, again roughly spe.iking, re-
 fer to !he 'valence' (again Lewin's) of the situation as a whole: whether it is al tractive or aversive
 or merely 'demanding.' .. . \'1/e will refer to such a motive appearance of situations as sit11atio11al
 ,ncaning stn,ctures."
      23. Erik Rietveld, "Situated Normativity: The Normative Aspect of Embodied Cognition in
  Unreflective Actiont Mind 117, no. 468 (2008): 973-1001, at 987.
       24. Hence also the field Social Psychology, which is deeply indebted to Lewin. See for ex-
  ample the classic introductory work by Lee Ross and Richard E. Nisbett, T/1c Pcrso11 a11d t/ie
  Situation: Perspectives ofSocial Psychology (New York: McGraw- Hill, 1991) with a new introduc-
  tion by Malcolm Gladwell (London: Pinter and Martin, 2011 ).
       25. "Muslim woman wins $5 million verdict from AT&T for discrimination," http://,\f\vw
  .reuters.com /a rticle / us-usa-court-muslim -att-idUSBRE843lP520120504.
       26. Ellen Spolsk--y, "Making 'Quite Anew': Brain Modularity and C reativity," in Zunshine,
  Introduction to Cognitive Cu/rural Studies, 84.
      27. Kim Sterelny, Thought in a Hosrile World: The Evolution of H11111a11 Cognition (Ox.ford:
  BlackweU, 2003).
      28. Patrick Colm Hogan on "Literary Universals" in Zumhine, fotroduction to Cognirive
  Cultural Studies (50), cites the universal " We don't like to laugh at hostile jokes directed al
 groups of which we are part."
      29. Gordon H. Orians and Judith H. Heerwagen, "Evolved Responses to L,ndscapes,"
 in The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the Generation of C ulture, ed. Jerome H.
 Barkow, Leda Cosmides, and John Tooby (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992) , 555 - 579;
Gordon H. Orians, "An Evolutionary Perspective on Aesthetics," B11/letin of Psychology am/ the
Arts 2, no. 1 (2001): 25-29.
     30. David Herman, "1880-1945: Re-Minding Modernism," in The Emergence of Mind: Uep-
re=tations of Conscioumess in Narrative Discourse in English, ed. David Herman (Lincoln: Uni-
versity of Nebraska Press, 2011), 265. David Herman's "cognitive approach" of the third wave
outstrips, in my opinion, any approach that is tied more closely to "an evolved and culturally
developed human nature" than it is to local ecologies. He uses an example from James Joyce's
Portrait scene that takes place when Stephen goes to the chapel across town to confess after hear-
ing Father Arnall's sermon about hell. "Figuring a tight coupling of intelligent agent and broader
environment, Joyce's text suggests how the history of Stephen's interactions with his material
and social surroundings give rise to the world that he experiences or enacts. ... 'lt was the
woman: soft wh~pering cloudlets, soft whispering vapour whispering and vanishing.' ... The
passage in fact reflects a tension between two systems of understanding, religious and poetics/
aesthetic, and suggests the extent to which Stephen oscillates between them, switching back .ind
fonh between two ways of orienting himself within his environment via two competing sets of
action ponibilities" (258-259). See also David Herman, Storytelling am/ the Sciences of Mimi
NOT ES T O       PA GES     102 - 112                                                                 165

 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2013). Thanks to Brendan Shapiro for alerting me to Herman's
work on this topic.
       31. An n Radcliffe, Tlie Romance of1l1e Forest, edited with an introduction and not cs by Chloe
Chard (Oxford : Oxfo rd University Prcss, 1986).
       32. William G ilpin, Observatiom, Relative Cl,iefly to Picturesq14e Beauty, Made in tl,e Year
 1772, 011 Several Part s of fa,gland, i'artirnlarly tire Mormtaim aml Lakes of C1m1berland, and West-
 more/am/, Vol. 1, 2nd ed. (Londo n: R. Dlamire, 1788), 13. See also Natasha Duquette, "'The Gran-
deur of the Abbey': Exploring Gothic Architecture in Novels by Helen Maria Williams, Ann
Radcliffe, and Jane Austen," in Persuasions 011-Li11e, A Publication of the lane Austen Society of
North America, 31, no. 1 (2010). For some related criticism, sec also Cynthia Sundberg Wall, The
Prose of T/1ings: Tra11 sformatio11s ofDescription in the Eig/11eenth Cemury (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2006), especially chapter 8 where Radcliffe presents the reader with fully visual-
ized settings in which events will occur.
       33. Merleau- Ponty, Plre110111e11ology ofPerception, referencing Koffka, Some Problems ofSpace
Perception: "It is certain I do have the experience o f the landscape, but in this experience I'm
conscious of taking up a factual situation, o f bringing together a significance dispersed among
phenomena, a nd of saying what they of their own accord mean" (263) .
       34. Sir Walter Scott, Tl,e Lives of Novelists ( Philadelphia: H. C. Carey & I. Lea, 1825), 220-221.
       35. Anticipating chapter 4, I give you Merleau -Pon ty al just this point: "The instability of
levels produces not only the intellectual experience of disorder, but the vital experience of gid-
diness and nausea, which is the awareness of our own contingency and the horror with which it
fi lls us" (Plie110111enology of Perceptiorr, 228).


                                             Chapter Four

      1. The most developed history of this model is Gail Kem Paster, Hw11oring the Body: £1110-

 tiom and tlie Sl,akespearea n Stage (Chicago: University of C hicago Press, 2004).
      2. What is the difference between feeling and emotion? The distinction can be merely a
matter of stipulated defin ition, though we find some real investment in whichever seems dis-
ti nctl y hu man. For instance, most would attribute feelings to a wide range of living organisms
including a dog wh ich - not who-might plausibly feel bad about che,ving up the pillow but
less plausibly grief stricken or remorseful. On a theoretical register Brian Massumi writes that
e motions provide a " sociolinguistic fixing of the quality of an experience which is from that
point onward de fined as personal." Parables for tl1e Virt11al: Movemelll, Affect, Sensation (Dur-
ham: D uke University Press, 2002), 28. Contrarily, neuroscientist Antonio Damasio's influential
distinction tells us " Emo tions play o ut in the theater of the body. Feelings play out in the the-
ater of the mi nd." Looking f or Spi11oza: Joy, Sorrow, a11d tire Feeling Brai11 (New York: Harcourt,
1999), 28. I am interested in something else altogether, namely the emotions o r feelings that
are not personal, like the amusement in an amusement park. See Daniel M. Gross, Tlie Secret
History of Emotion: From Aristotle's Rhetoric to Modem Brni11 Scicnc~ (Ch icago: University of
Chicago Press, 2006). For the sake of this chapter that proceeds by way of colloquial expressio n ,
I will use o ne of the two terms according to local usage.
     3. Wired, http:!/archive. wired.com /culture /geekipedia/magazine /geekipedia/unca nny_v-.illey.
"This is the uncanny valley, the point at which an ;1utomaton looks too human for comfort. The
yuck fa ctor arises from subverted expectations, says robo ticist Masahiro Mori, who coined the
phrase in the 1970s." T he sorites paradox provides what is for us a convenient explanation of
the uncanny valley: Stimuli with human and nonhuman traits "undermine our sense of human
166                                                              NOTES      TO   PAGES      112 - 114
identity by linking qualitatively different categories, human and nonhuman, by a quantitat ive
metric, degree of human likeness." C. H. Ramey, "The Uncanny Valle)' of Similarities concern-
ing Abortion, Baldness, Heaps of Sand, and Hum,mlike Robots," Proce,·dings of Views of r/11:
 Urrcariny Valley Workshop: IEEE-RAS Irrtcrnational Confercncc 0 11 H tm1anoid Rol1ots: 8- 13.
      4. Throughout this chapter I will be quoting from Oxford World's C lassics, Jane Austen,
 Scme and Sensibility, ed. James Kinsley, with an introduction by Margaret An ne Doody and
 notes by Clare Lamont (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008).
       5. In fact, models of homeostasis broadly dete r rhetorical analysis of emotion. In her essay,
 ~Mi..xed Feelings in Aristotle's Rltctoric," Dorothea Frede does touch upon temporality when she
 explains how, foUm,fog Plato in the Pltilcb,,s, some feelings are the result or pro positional atti -
 tudes that can turn out to be wrong: "cubic zirconia?!" In Essay 011 Aristotle's Rhetoric, ed. Amelie
 Oksenbcrg Rorty (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996), 258- 285, at 262. Aris to tle's inno-
 ,-ation beyond Plato, Frede argues, is the way he fine-tunes the definition of e mo tions around in-
 tentional objects temporally innected ("Thanks for the lovely gift"). Inc:1.-plicably, however, Frede
 subsumes this innovation to a Phileban " remedial" frame,vork where the psychic disturbance of
 mixed feelings resolves toward a natural equilibrium (259), and this desp ite the fact that Frede
 admits Aristotle uses the vocabulary of "mi)l."ture" nO\vhere at all (268). Likewise in h is wo rk on
 "ambivalence" following Bleuler, Sigmund Freud veers toward a homeostatic model when the
 therapeutic obj~ is at issue: the individual psyche has parts or locations in more or Jess stable re-
 lation to one another. Thus in Totem and Taboo psychoanalysis is " concerned ,vith the study of the
 unconscious portion [Arrteifj of the individual psychic life" (25); while the ambivalence of huma n
 emotions can be difficult to adjust "because- there is no other way of putting it- they are local-
 ized in the subject's mind in such a manner tha1 they cannot come up aga inst each other" (28).
 So for instance a person knows nothing about his desire to touch the taboo object; at the same
 time he abominates that very act of touching. Quotes from The Sta11dard Edition of the Co111plctc
 Psychological Works ofSigmtmd Fret1d, ed. James Strachey, Vol. 13 (London: Hogart Press, 1986).
      6. Gilles Fauconnier and Mark Turner, The Way We Thi11k: Co11cepttial Blending aml the
 Mind's Hidden Complexities (New York: Basic Books, 2002).
      7. State-of-the-art hedonics are evident in these recent speeches by someone who is ge ner-
 ally not a crass utilitarian: Ben S. Bernanke's August 6, 2012, speech to the 32nd General Confer-
 ence of the Jnternational Association for Research in Income and Wealth, Cambridge, Massa-
 chusetts, available on the Federal Reserve website: http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents /
 speech/bemanke20120806a.htm; Ben S. Bernanke "The Economics of Happiness,'' speech
delivered at the University of South Carolina commencement ceremony, Columbia, South
Carolina, May 8, 2010, www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech /bernanke20100508a.htm.
For a welcome critique of the movement especially in its utilitarian dimension see Deirdre N.
McCloskey, "Happyism: The Creepy New Economics of Pleasure," N~ Repriblic, June 28, 2012.
      8. John Stuart Mill famously complemented Bentham with Coleridge: "The two men
are each other's 'completing counterpart': the strong points of each correspond to the weak
points of the other. Whoever could master the premises and combine the methods of both,
would possess the entire English philosophy of their age." London a11d West111i11stcr Review 33
(March 1840): 257-302.
     9. Paul Ekman, "An Argument for Basic Emotions," Cognitio11 and E111olio116, no. 3/4 ( 1992):
169-200, at 170; Emotions Revealed: Recog11izi11g Faccs and Feelings to Improve Com1111111icatio11
and Emotio11al Life (New York: Holt, 2003), 212, 69.
     10. Page 213 gives us "Elinor's astonishment at this commission" from Colonel Brandon.
     11. Classical French understanding linked astonishment with admiration, and astonishment
 NOTES TO         PAGES      114 - 11 7
  wit h fear. Sec Charles Le llrun, A Met/rod to Learn to Dcsig11 r/rc Passio11s (Los Angeles: William
  Andrews Clark Memorial Library, University of California Press, 1980).
        12. Surprise more often implicatcs a human ac1an1 - e.g., a surprise attack- as opposed lo
 astonishment, which more often implicates non-human actants such as thunderbolt-throwing
 deities or in our long eighteenth century, picturesque landscapes. OED etymology compares
 classical Latin a11011are: 10 strike with a thunderbolt, swn, stupefy. Obsolete meanings include
 loss of sense, or insensibility. Active meaning includes astonishment as " mental dislurbance or
 excitement due to the sudden presentation of anything unlooked for or unaccountable," which
 speaks directly to our utililarian concerns. Compare OED on surprise: "The feeling or mental
 stale, akin to aslonishment and wonder, caused by an unexpected occurrence or circumstance."
       13. Ekman relabels everythi ng beyond his seven basic emotions "affective commitments."
 See chapter 1.
       14. "There are 1wo very different ways to interpret a relation between an emotional incentive
 and the brain profile - for example, a face with a fearful expression and activity in the amyg-
 dala. The popular view attribules the relation to the induction of the stale in the person that
 matches the symbolic meaning of the incentive; therefore, the viewer is afraid. A second, equally
 reasona ble explanation is that the brain reacted to an event that was unexpected or unfamiliar
 and the viewer was surprised or experienced response uncertainty" (74). Jerome Kagan, \Vliat
 ls Emotion? History, Measures, rmd Mea11i11gs ( New Haven: Yale University Press, 2007). For
 relevant history see O1nicl Dror, " Whal Is an Excitement?" in Scie11ce a11d Emotion after 1945: A
 Trtwsarlar11ic Perspective, ed. Frank Biess and Daniel M . Gross (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2014).
      15. Alex Woloch , Tire One vs. tire Ma11y: Mi11or Characters a11d r/re Space of rlre Prorago11ist i11
 tire Novel (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003), 30.
       16. Gilbert Ryle, "Jane Austen and the Moralists." First published in Oxford Review, no. 1
(1966): 5-18. Ryle is here interested in Se11se and Se11sibility and Aristotelian "equilibrium." See
also Alasdair MacIntyre, After Virllle, 3rd ed. (Notre Dame, IN: Notre Dame University Press,
2007), 240. "A major emotion underlying Jane Austen's novels is what D. W. Harding called her
' regulated hatred' of the attitude of society to unmarried women .... When Jane Austen speaks
of 'happiness', she does so as an Aristotelian. Gilbert Ryle believed that her Aristolelianism-
which he saw as the due to the moral temper of her novels-may have derived from a reading
of Shaftesbury. C. S. Lewis with equal justice sought in her an essentially Christian writer. It is a
reuniting of Christian and Aristotelian themes in a determinate social context that makes Jane
Austen the last great effective imaginative voice of the tradition of thought about, and practice
of, the virtues whic h I have tried to identify. She turns away from the competing catalogs of
the virtues of the eighteenth century and restores a teleological perspective. Her heroines seek
the good through seeking their own good in marriage. The restricted households of Highbury
and Mansfield Park have to serve as surrogates for the Greek city-state and the medial kingdom"
(240). In Tire Bourgeois Virtues: Ethics for <111 Age of Commerce (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2007), 373-376, Deirdre N. McCluskey offers Austen as an example of the seven cardinal
virtues narrated for the sake of an implied audience, but no longer systematized. I would add
by way of this chapter that Austen is a thorough critic of certain kinds of systematic thinking,
in this case utilitarian. This essay also suggests that Austenian happiness is not Aristotelian +
Christian, as MacIntyre suggests.
    17. Catch trials arc designed to address the Kagan surprise problem in the laboratory: "In
summary, the proposed method can be used to separate the hemodynmnic responses to neural
events that occur in a fixed sequence wi1hin a compound tri.il without making any assumptions
168                                                              NOTl!S TO        PAGES     11 7- 120
 ab.)UI the shape of the hemodynamic response. The onlr restriction is that the experimemal par-
 adigm includes partial lrials that are cognitively equivaknt to the ini1i,1I stage of the co mpound
  trials." J. M. Ollingcr, G. L. Shulman, and M. Corbella, "Separating Processes wilhin a Trial in
  Event-Related Functional MRI: 1. The Method," Neuroimage 13, no. 1 (2001): 210-217, al 216.
         18. Lisa Feldman Barrett, Kristen A. Lindquist, .ind Maria Ge ndron, " La nguage as Context
  for Emotional Perception," Trends in Cognitive Science 11, no. 8 (2007): 327- 332.
         19. Knight Dunlap, ~Are Emotions Teleological Construcls?" America11 Joumal of Psyc/10/-
   0g)' 44, no. 3 (1932): 572-576, at 574.
         20. Instead of working exclusively in the laboratory, Paul Griffiths and And rea Scarantino
   track "emotions in the wild" as they try to shift theoretical focus to neglected phenomena such
   as anger in a marital quarrel or embarrassment while delivering a song to an audie nce. See dis-
   cussion in my Introduction.
         :n. A summary is found in Beth Innocenti, " Towards a Theory of Vivid Descriptio n as Prac-
   ticed in Cicero's '\'errine' Orations," Rhetorica 12, no. -1 (1994): 355 - 381.
         22. The ~Grounding Emotion" article provides this protocol in the supplementary mate-
   rial. uFor the physical situations, the template specified the following six sentences in order: P1
   described a setting and activity performed by the immersed participant in the setting, along with
    ·elevanl personal attributes; S1 provided visual detail about the setting; P2A described an action
   (A) of the immersed participant; P2C described the consequence (C) of lhat action; S2 described
   the participant's action in response to the consequence; S3 described the participant's resulti ng
   external somatosensory experience (on the body surface). The templates fo r the social situa-
   tions were similar, except that S1 provided auditory detail about the selling (instead of visual
   detail), S2 described another person's action in response lo the co nsequence ( not action by the
   immersed participant), and S3 described the participant's resulting internal bodily experience
   (not on the body surface)." Supplementary data associated with this article can be found , in the
   online version, at doi:10.1016/ j.neuropsychologia.2010.12.032. Here Supplementary Material p. 1.
         23. Wayne Booth famously writes about Jane Austen's Emma in his demonstration of how
  a reader is invited to measure the distance between character and norm (256) in lhe scene,
  for instance, where Emma "boasts to Harriet of her indifference to marriage, at the sa me time
  unconsciously betraying her totally inadequate view of the source of human happiness" (260):
  "If I draw less, I shall read more; if I give up music, I shall take to carpet-work ... I shall be very
  well off. with all the children of a sister I love so much, to care about. There will be enough of
  them, in all probability, to supply every sort of sensation that declining life can need . . . ." Ac-
 cording to Booth, the humor of this scene "can be fully enjoyed, in fact, only by the reader who
 has attained to a vision of human felicity far more profound than Emma's 'comfort' and 'want'
 and 'need'" (261). The Rhetoric of Fiction (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1961). Though I
 agree with Booth and McCloskey insofar as they map how Austen's readers must be implicated
 in the emotional situation, I am attributing to Austen more authorial skepticism about human
 felicity than either McCloskey or Booth would grant. A very different and impo rtant literary-
 historical treatment of happiness can be found in Vivas van Soni, Mo11rnir1g Happiness: N arrative
 and the Politia of Modernity (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2010).
        24. Published in Orga,1izational Behavior ar1d Human Decision Processes 51, no. 2 (1992):
296-312. Research psychologist Daniel Kahneman is author of the hugely popula r T hinking,
 Fast and Slow and winner of the 2002 Nobel Prize in economics for his work on prospect theo ry,
which helped launch the revolution in behavioral economics. For our purposes, prospect lhe-
ory is interesting because, contra traditional utility theory, it demonstrates how relative values
in any given situation matters more to an individual than absolute value calculated ralionally.
 NOTES TO PAG E S 121 - 122

  Dan id Kahncman and Amos Tvcrsky, "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk,"
  Eco110111etricn, 47 ( March 1979), 263-291.
       25 . What is utilitarian, or hedonic calculus? Bentham's A Frag111c11t 011 Govcm111e111 (1776)
  gives us chis classic formula: " It is the greatest happiness of the greatest number that is the
  measure of right and wrong" (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1891), 93. So if you wan! to know what
  action is right in a given situation, Bentham would have you consider the pleasures and pains
  resulting from it, wit h respect to their intcmity, duration, ccrtai111y, propinquity, fern11dity (the
  chance that a pleasure is followed by other ones, a pain by further pains), purity (the chance that
  pleasure is followed by pains and vice versa), and extent (the number of persons affected). This
 is fro m An I111roduc1io11 to the Principles of Morals and Legislatio11 (Mineola, NY: Dover, 2007
  [1780]), 29 - 30. Meanwhile this 1780 Introductio11 states, "By the principle of utility is meant that
 principle which approves or disapproves of every action whatsoever, according to the tendency
 which it appears to have to augment or diminish the happiness of the party whose interest is in
 question" (2). On the evolution of this principle see J. H. Burns, "Happiness and Utility: Jeremy
 Bentham's Equation," Utilitas 17, no. 1 (2005), 46-61.
       26. Cf. Bentham, lntroductio11, chapter VI, "Of Circumstances Influencing Sensibility," 53:
 "With regard to strength of expectation; when one man expeclS to gain or to keep a thing which
 another does not, it is plain the circumstance of not having it will affect the former very differ-
 ently from the latter; who, indeed, commonly will not be affected by it at all."
      27. David A. Schkade and Daniel Kahneman, "Does Living in California Make People
 Happy? A Focusing Illusion in Judgments of Life Satisfaction," Psyc/1ological Scie11ce 9, no. 5
 (1998): 340 -346. A call for the conference "Thinking Feeling: Critical Theory, Culture, Feel-
 ing," May 2012, University of Sussex: "Happiness Is Obsolete: Uneconomic" (Theodor Adorno,
 Minima Mora lia). " As the recent English riots indicate, there is no escaping the fact that eco-
 nomics provokes, amongst other things, strong feelings. Whether we like it or not, a neoliberal
 language of economics now pervades and colours our inner 'private' emotional lives; the gov-
 ernment's emerging plans to compile a 'happiness index' is another example of how a rhetoric
 or discourse of ' feeling' can be co-opted by capital. More than ever, then, it is important we do
 not simply accept 'feeling' as a spontaneous or natural phenomenon, but instead subject it to
genuinely critical scrutiny." https://centreformoderniststudiessussex.wordpress.com /thinking
 -feeling-conference/.
      28 . «Unlike Falstaff, or even Shylock, Brutus cannot simply be dismissed for attempting, in
Peacham's phrase, to oppose the truth by false terms. But nor is he able to provide an unassail-
able justification of h is act. Was he a purger or merely a murderer? It is part of his tragedy, we
are made to realize, that this is a question without an answer: it will always be possible to argue
in 11tra111q11c partem, on either side of the case. Such is the power of rhetoric; more specifically,
such is the power of paradiastole." In Sylvia Adamson, Gavin Alexander, and Katrin Ettenhuber,
eds., Renaissance Figures of Speec/1 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007), 163.
      29. Daniel Kahneman et al. describe mixed feelings in a few different ways. See for instance
Well-Being: Tire Fo1111datiom of Hcdo11ic Psyclrology (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1992)
on "Objective Happiness" (9). " The bipolar nature of the Good/ Bad dimension raises some dif-
ficult questions .... Imagine, for example, that you are out in the country during a cold night,
inadequately dressed for the torrential rain, your clothes soaked. A stinging cold wind completes
your misery. As you wander around you run into a large rock that provides some shelter from
the fury of the wind. The event is certainly associated with a reduction in pain. Cabanac would
call the experience of that moment intensely pleasurable, because he believes that the function of
pleasure is to indicate the direction of a biologically significant change. However, the experience
170                                                                NOT E S TO PAG E S 1 22 - 128

could also be described as a composite of pleasure and pain, or perhaps as a succession of affec-
tive events in which pleasurable relief is quickly followed by .1 return of (diminished ) d istress."
      30. An important and early genealogy along these lines is Albert 0. Hi rschman, Tlw Pns-
 sions a11d InteTC$ts: Political Argwnrnts for Capit11lis111 before Its Tri11111p/r (Princeton: Princeton
 University Press, 1977).
      31. Paul Goring, Tiu· Rhetoric of Sensibility i11 Eigl1tce11tlr-Cem11ry C11lt11re (Cambridge: Cam -
 bridge University Press, 2005).
       32. There has been much excellent literature on this topic, includ ing J. G. A. Pocock's fo un -
 dational work; for references and literature see Daniel M. Gross, Secret History ofEmotion, chap-
  ter 4, "The Politics of Pride in David Hume and David Simple." For a relevant readi ng of Jane
  Austen's Pride and Prej11dice fictionalized promises in light of the 179 7 Bank Restriction Act that
 saw prices rise as paper money proliferated, see Mary Poovey, Genres of tl,e Credit Eco11omy:
  Medinri11g Val11e i11 Eightcentli- mid Ninetee11t/r-Ce11t11ry Britain (Chicago: University of Chicago
  Press, 2008), 357- 372.
       33. David Hume explicitly defined causation in terms of counterfactuals when he defines a
  cause as ~an object followed by nnot/rer, a11d where all tire objects, similnr to tire first, are follo wed
  by objects similar to the seco11d. Or, in other words, where, if the first object liad 1101 bee11, the
  second never had existed." Arr lllq11iry co11cenri11g H1m1a11 Understanding (Oxford: Oxford Uni-
  versity Press, 1999 [1748]), 146. In the classic textbook Causation i11 tlie Law, H . L.A. Hart and
  Tony Honore argue that the distinction benveen causes and conditions is relative to context of
  enquiry, or what we would call rhetoric. For example, the cause of a great famine in India may
  be identified by an Indian farmer as the drought, but the World Foo d Authori ty may iden tify
  the Indian government's failure to build up reserves as the cause, and the drought as a mere
  condition. H. L. A. Hart and Tony Honore, Causatio11 in rhe Law (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
  1965; cited :!nd ed. 1985), 35.
       34. Thanks to Jens Lloyd for alerting me to this example, Maureen Fitzsimmo ns for remind-
  ing me to read Kahneman, and generally to my Winter 2012 UC! graduate seminar p~rticipants
 for providing the rich conversation that produced this project.
       35. Alex Woloch's "Character Insecurity in Austen's Sense and Sensibility," in Narrat ive
  Middles: Navigating the Nineteentli- Cent11ry Novel, ed. Caroline Levine and Mario Ortiz-Robles
 (Columbus: Ohio State University Press, 2011) gives us the analysis o f relative value in Hegelian
 (not utilitarian) tenns: "Even as we derive a set of consequential differences out of our varied
 juxtapositions of Marianne and Elinor we need also to focus on the rather unforgiving way in
 which Sense and Sensibility suggests that identity-and analysis itself-emerges only through
 juxtaposition.... An objeCI does not possess intrinsic qualities that are directly discernible to
consciousness, but only emerge as an object-with specific, defining characteristics- in nega-
 tive relation to others.... This decline of intrinsic value is rooted in much larger socio-historical
developments. Like Hegel's Plrenomenology of Mind, a text written almost contemporaneously
with Austen's work bears witness lo a world in which absolute value no lo nger inheres within
objects themselves but only emerges as the individual object or individual person is placed in
radically contingent relationship to other, equally unstable, o bjects or persons" (;1.9).
      36. Mary Wollstonecraft, A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (New York: W. W. Norton,
1988), 65.
      37. Jn an early and influential article, historian of emotion William Reddy has this to say
about Paxtun marriage situations and emotional ambivalence: "The implicatio n here is not that
cenain feelings such as grief at death arc ' natural' or universal. Situations of intense ambivalence
NOTllS TO        l'A G l!S   129 - 130                                                              171

arc likely in most social orders because they arrange for and encourage emotional allachmcnts
or hopes 1ha1 inevitably come into conflict. A young Paxtun woman is encouraged by institu-
tional ar ra ngements that offer both rewards and penalties to develop a deep allachmcnt to her
mother. Al the same time, marriage is an essential element of the normative life cycle. Thus a
wedding is highly likely to generate intense ambivalence in a bride. Intense ambivalence can be
a nodal point of instability in a normative emotional style. By allowing women full expression
of sorrow (but not other feelings) and by treating sorrow as a source of honor for women, Pax-
tun convention tries to tip the balance of ambivalence toward grief. This is not culture creating
grief but convention promoting certain emotives over others because, over time, these emotives
strongly influence individual emotion in a manner that allows for a certain stability and ideo-
logic.il comprehensibility in a community's life." William M. Reddy, "Against Constructionism:
The Histo rical Eth nography of Emotions," in Current A11thropology 38, no. 3 (1997): 327-351,
at 334.


                                              Epilogue
      1. Geistcswisse11schafte11 is a term of the middle nineteenth century established by Schiel,

 Helmholtz, and D roysen as a catch-all contrary to the natural sciences, or Nt111mvisseuschafte11.
 See for instance Hans Georg Gadamer, Trnth a11d Method, 2nd rev. ed., trans. Joel Weinsheimer
and Donald G. Marshall (New York: Crossroad, 1989), 3- 42. Anglo-American and German dis-
 tinctions overlap significantly, with a tripartite classification system 1) humanities 2) human
sciences 3) natural sciences complicating the transatlantic academic traditions. "Interpretive"
social sciences would be grouped with humanities in a binary classification, and social science
 fields anchored in quantitative methodologies grouped with natural sciences.
      2. Two examples among many: Patricia Clough and Jean Halley, eds., Tire Affective Tum:
 Tlreorizing tire Social (Durham: Duke University Press, 2007); see also the proceedings of "The
Emotional Turn in the Social Sciences," a conference held at UCLA in November of 2011. For a
 perspective in social science, see Margaret Weatherell, A/Jeer a11d Emotion: A New Social Scie11ce
 U11dersra11di11g (London: Sage, 2012), where a "situated" approach referencing Sara Ahmed and
Lisa Feldman Barrett prevails.
      3. Summa ry of mirror neuron research can be found in Marco lacoboni, Mirroring People:
 The New Scic11ce of How We Co11necr with Otl1ers (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2008).
      4. Carolyn J. Dean, "Empathy, Pornography, and Suffering," Diffcre11ccs: A Journal of Femi-
11ist C11/t11ml Studies 14, no. 1 (2003): 89-123. See her footnote 5 for a brief history of the term.
      5. Andrea Scarantino and Paul Griffiths, "Don't Give Up on Basic Emotions," Emotion Re-
view 3, no. 4 (2011): 444 - 454, at 452. More compatible ";th our project is scientific psychologist
Jerome Kagan's call for a moratorium on the use of single words such as "fear," urging experts
to use instead full sentences to write about the emotional process. See Jerome Kagan, Wlr<11 Is
 Emotion? History, Measures, and Mcm1 i11gs (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2007), 216.
      6. Steven Pinker, "Toward a Consilient Study of Literature," Philosophy 11111/ Literature 31,
no. 1 (2007) : 162 - 178, at 176. The problem with Pinker's approach and others like it is the vast
distance between the evolutionary-psychological model and the work of literature itself. In-
deed, Pinker explicitly distances the analysis from the local culture of its object: "one h;is to
show-i11dcpc11elemly of a11ytl1i11g we know about the l111ma11 bc:liavior i11 q11estio11--that X, by its
intrinsic design, is capable of causing a reproduction-enh,mcing outcome in an environment
like the one in which humans evolved. This analysis can't be a kind of psychology; it must be a
172                                                            NOTES TO         PAGES     130 - 1)3

kind of engineering-an attempt to lay dmvn the design specs of a system that can accomplish
a goal {specifically, a subgoal of reproduction) in a particular world (specifically, the ancestral
environment)" (170).
     7. A s),i1pathetic project-minus the literary humanities-is outlined by Jan Slaby, "Steps
Towards a Critical Neuroscience," in P/re110111c110/ogr am/ Cog nirivc Science 9, no. 3 ( 2010 ): 397-
416. See also Suparna Choudhury and Jan Slab}', eds., Critical Neuroscience: A Handbook of t/1e
 Social a11d C11lr11ral Co111t•xts of Neuroscience (Southgate: Wiley-Blackwell, 2012); Jordynn Jack,
ed., Ne11ror/rcrorics (New York: Routledge, 2012).
     8. Critiques of brain science of emotion include the following: Kagan cited above ( 2007);
 Alva Noe, 011r of 011r Heads: Wliy ¥011 Are Noc Your Brain, and Orlrcr Lcsso11s fro111 tire Biology of
Consciousness (New York: Hill and Wang, 2009); Paolo Legrenzi and C. A. Umiltil, Nc1trOI/Jt111ia :
011 rl1c Limits of Brain Science (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011 ); Raymond Tallis, Aping
i\fo11/cind: Ne11roma11ia, Danviniris and tire Misrepresc11tarion of Hu111a11ity ( Durham, England:
Acumen, !011); Ruth Leys, uThe Turn to Affect: A Critique," Critical l11q11iry 37, no. 3 (2011 ):
434-472; Ruth Leys, u'Both of Us Disgusted in My lnsula': Mirror Neuron Theory an d Emo-
 tional Empathy," in Scie11ce a11d Emorions after 1945: A Tra11satla11ric Perspective, ed. Frank Biess
 and Daniel M. Gross (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2014), 6 7-9 5.
      9. A recent summary critique of brain imaging can be found in Sally Sate! and Scott 0.
 Lilienfeld, Brainwashed: Tire Seductive Appeal of Mindless Neuroscience (New York: Basic, 2013).
 See also Joseph Durnil, "Critically Producing Brain Images of Mind," in Critical Neuroscience,
 ed. Suparna Choudhury and Jan Slaby, 195-225.
      10. Hau Olausson et al., "Unmyelinated Tactile Afferents Signal Touch and Project to Insular
 Cortex," Nar11re Neuroscience 5, no. 9 (2002): 900-904.
      11. Tania Singer et al. , uEmpathy for Pain Involves the Affective but Not Sensory Compo-
 nents of Pain," Soence 303, no. 5661 (2004): 1157-1162.
     12. James Swain, Pilyoung Kim, and S. Shaun Ho, "Neuroendocri nology of Parental Re-

sponse to Baby Cry," Journal of Ne11roendocri11ology 23, no. 11 ( 2011 ): 1036-1041.
    13. Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under
Risk," Economerrica: Journal of the Econometric Sooety 47, no. 2 (1979): 263- 291.
    14. Scon Rick, Cynthia Cryder, and George Loewenstein, "Tightwads and Spendthrifts,"
Journal of Consumer Research 34, no. 6 (2008): 767-782.
    15. Kathleen Vohs, Nicole Mead, and Miranda R. Goode, "The Psychological Consequences
of Money," Science 314, no. 5802 (2006): 1154-1156.
    16. Stephanie Preston and F. B. M. de Waal, "Altruism," in Tire 1-la11dboolc of Social
Neuroscience, ed. Jean Decety and John Cacioppo (New York: Oxford University Press: 2011) ,
565-585.
    17. Ed Yong and Uri Simonsohn, "The Data Detective," Nature 487, no. 7405 (July 5, 2012 ):
18-19.
    18. Chris D. Frith, uThe Social Brain?," Philosophical Tra11sactio11s of the Royal Society B:
Biological Sciences 362, no. 1480 (2007): 671-678.
    19. Simon Baron-Cohen, Zero Degrees of Empathy: A New Tlieory of Human Cruelty (Lon-
don: Allen Lane, 2011).
      20. Hannah Faye Chua et al., uNeural Correlates of Message Tailoring and Self-Relatedness
in Smoking Cessation Programming," Biological Psychiarry 65 (2009): 165-168.
   21. For a review of the neural theory of information processing see Michael Anderson,
"Neural Reuse: A Fundamental Organi1.ational Principle of the Brain," Behavioral and Brain
 NOT E S TO      l'AGES    133 - 141                                                             173

  Sciences 33, no. 4 (2010): 245 - 266. For a criti<Jue of "informal ion processing" terminology and
  the computational model of mind, sec Alva Noe, cited above.
       22. Floren tin Worgotter and Ulf Eysel, "Context, State and 1he Receptive Fields of S1riatal
 Cortex Cells," Trends in Ne11roscie11ccs 23, no. 10 (2000): 497-503.
       23. Although localing an "empathy circuit" in 1he brain is not e,cactly the same thing as
  locating compassion primarily within the scope of personal expression. each of these e,cplana-
  lions for pro- or anti -social behavior attribute the phenomenon to personhood fundamentally,
  thus mitigating against explanations that are fundamentally social: e.g., empathy requires the
 perception of similarity, which is socially determined and therefore can be socially transformed
 (see discussion below).
       24. Vi nod Menon , "Dissociating Prefrontal and Parietal Corte,c Activation during Arithme-
 tic Processing," Ne11rol111age 12, no. 4 ( 2000): 357-365.
       25. Stanislas Dehaene et al., " Sources of Mathematical Thinking: Behavioral and Brain-
 Imaging Evidence," Science 284, no. 5416 (1999): 970- 974.
       26. Vilayanur Ramachandran and Edward Hubbard, "The Phenomenology of Synaesthe-
 sia," Journal of Conscio11rness S111dies 10, no. 8 (2003): 49 -57.
       27. Olaf Blanke et al., "Inducing Illusory Own-Body Perceptions," Nature 419 (2002):
 269-270.
       28. E.g., Eva Bonda et al., "Neural Correlates of Mental Transformations of the Body-in-
 Space," Proceedings of tl,e National Academy ofSciences of the United Stares ofAmerica 92 ( 1995):
 11180 - 11184; and Gemma Calvert, Ruth Campbell, and Michael Brammer, "Evidence from
 Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of C rossmodal Binding in the Human Hctero-moda'
 Cortex," C11rre11t Biology 10, no. 11 (2000): 649 - 657.
      29. Russell Poldrack, "Can Cognitive Processes Be Inferred from Neuroimaging Data
 Tremls i11 Cognitive Sciences 10, no. 2 (2006): 59-63.
      30. Simon Baron-Cohen, Alan Leslie, and Uta Frith, "Does the Autistic Child Have a 'The
ory of Mind'?" Cognition 21, no. 1 (1985); 37-46.
      31. lohn M. Wang et al., "The Neural Bases of Acquisitiveness: Decisions to Acquire and
 Disca rd Everyday Goods Differ across Frames, Items, and Individuals," Nc11ropsychologia 50,
no. 5 ( 2012): 939-948.
      32. Antonio Damasio, The Feeling of What Happe11S: Body and Emotio11 in t/re Making of
Co11scio11s11ess ( New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2000), 400.
      33. This historical thesis is further elaborated in Frank Biess and Daniel M. Gross, eds., Sci-
ence and Emotion after 1945.
      34. Elizabeth Phelps et al., "Performance on Indirect Measures of Race Evaluation Predicts
Amygdala Activation," Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 12, no. 5 (2000): 729-738. A portion of
this experiment description and critique appeared in Daniel M. Gross, "Toward a Rhetoric of
Cognition," Neurorhetorics, ed. Jordynn Jack (New York: Routledge, 2012).
     35. See for example Lisa Feldman Barrett, Kristen A. Lindquist, and Maria Gendron, "Lan-
guage as Conte,ct for Emotional Perception," Trends i11 Cog11iti1•e Science 11, no. 8 (2007): 327-
332. Barrett's basic commitment, however, is to the "pS)'Chological construction of emotion,"
which she distinguishes this way: ''The psychological construction research program tends to
focus its scientific lens on the withi11-pcrso11 operations involved in constructing emotion,11 epi-
sodes, whereas the social constructionist research program tends to focus on the bc1ive,·11-perso11
operations." Lisa Feldman Barrett and James A. Russell, eds., Tire Psyd,ologirnl Co11structio11 of
E111otio11 (New York: Guilford, 2015), 13. We would emphasize how a situated approach to cmo-
174                                                           NOTES TO        PAG E S 141 - 145

tion must be able to account for relevant factors that arc not just within- or between-person,
but also extra-personJI or bcrond the person, e.g., the historical institutions of racializcd hatred
(racial slavery for example).
     36. See for example James F. Source, Rob..:rt N . Emde, J. Campos, and Mary D. Klinnert,
"Maternal Emotional Signaling: Its Eftect on 1he Visual Cliff Bchavior of One-Year-Olds," Dc-
 wlop111l'11ral Psyc/10/ogy 21, no. 1 (1985): 195-200.
     37. Ethnographic and historical considerations distinguish our approach in this essay from
 neurophenomenology, ,,·hich integrates third-person and first-person data, or a ncuro-physio-
 phenomenological method that integrates first, second, and third-person methods. See Fran-
 cisco J. Varela, "Neurophenomcnology: A Methodological Remedy for the Hard Problem,"
 /011mal of Co11scio1m1ess Smdies 3, no. 4 (1996 ): 330 - 350; Giovanna Colombetti, T/1e Feeling
 Body: Ajfecti1·e Science Meets the Enactive Mind, chapter 6.
     38. Alicia J. Hofelich, "The Role of Unique Personal Representations in Understanding a nd
 Responding to the Emotions of Others, in Psychology" ( PhD diss., University of Michiga n,
2012), 154.
      39. Carolyn J. Dean, "Erasures: Writing History about Holocaust Trauma," in Science and
 Emotion after 1945, ed. Frank Biess and Daniel M. Gross, 387- 414.
      40. Dean continues: " The idea that we have embraced victims in this ' era o f the witness'
 (at least Jewish victims of the Holocaust) evades to what extent this new moral econo my is a
 part of the ongoing historical refashioning of cultural attitudes to victims. These atti tudes can
be understood only in relational and affective terms in which suspicion, envy, attachment, and
a,·ersion are all in the process of being reformulated in reference to a new historical context in
which the Holocaust of European Jewry has become problematically the paradigmatic catastro-
phe. It is crucial to recognize the power of a moral economy in which victims who demonstrated
no agency under pressure of circumstances were least respected, least dignified, and perhaps
even suspect. The narrative of the Holocaust is one of human willfulness aga inst the odds, of
human willfulness and its power to make or unmake the world, that is always implicated in any
discussion about victims and victimization, including a profound cultural investment in the
moral soundness of those who suffer. The introduction of the traumatized victim of catastro•
phe in his or her extreme disempowerrnent and traumatic, deferred, and thus often empirically
indecipherable grief, appears to have generated as much aversion and suspicion as sympathy"
(406-407).
     41. One alternative: the stable-state, dynamic-systems approach that is already common in
engineering and computer science. However, the inferences one can draw from such approaches
are qualitatively different than the dominant approaches, which will surely inhibit the spread of
such techniques in psychology per se. E.g., see Stephanie Preston and Alicia J. Hofclich, "The
Many Faces of Empathy: Parsing Empathic Phenomena through a Proximate, Dynamic-Systems
View of Repres.enting the Other in the Self," Emotion Review 4, no. 1 (2012): 24 - 33.
    42. The humanities, that is to say, not just the social sciences, as one sees for instance in
Joan Y. Chiao and Bobby K. Cheon, "C ultural Neuroscience as Critical Neuroscience and
Practicet in Critical Neuroscience, ed. Suparna Choudhury and Jan Slaby, 287-303.
                                                        Index




Actions mu/ Objects from Hobbes to Richardso11,             attachment: in The lnteresti11g Narrative, 52,
    15on34                                                     63-65, 67-69; and time, 63-64; and vested
Ad ams, Frederick, 155037                                      interest, 64 - 65
Adve11turcs of David Simple, The, 4-5, 49, 124              Austen, Jane, 27, 78, m; as Aristotelian, 167016;
Advenwres of Huckleberry Finn, Tire, 36                        astonishment in, 114, 115 fig. 4-2; as Christian
affect: and emotion, 11 - 13, 35, 149n25; his1ory              writer, 167016; "Elinor and Marianne," 113;
    of term, 11 ; in neuroscience, 12, 142; as pre•            Emma, 37, 168023; and emotion, 1; emotional
    ideological. 12                                            instability in, 112- 13; emotional rhetoric of,
Affecti11g Fictions, 35                                        113, 116- 17; love in, 84-85, 114-15, 120,123,130;
affect studies, 12 - 13, 18                                    mixed f~elings in, 2, 116-17; negation in, 46,
affordances: emotional, 4; of human envi-                      47- 48, 120; Pemiasio11, 1; Pride and Prejudice,
   ronme nts, 91 - 92, 104; literary, 154024; as               114, 115 fig. 4.2; sentiment in, 8; utilitarianism,
   rhe1orical, 99; in Romance of the Forest, 106-8.            critique of, Ill , 119-20, 121; on 'numen's com-
   See also affordance theory; Gibson, James J.                fort, 126-28. See also Se11seand Sensibility
affordance theory, 20, 92-101; and environments,            Austin, J. L., 107
   95; and Gestalt psychology, 94; and rhetoric, 22,        Ayer, A. J., 15103
   92- 93. See also affordances; Gibson, James J.
Afro-Pessim ism, 19, 72- 73, 162042                         Bailkin, Jordanna, 149024
Ahmed, Sara, 16, 15on33, 17102; on comfort,                 Barrell, Lisa Feldman, 9, 117-20, 12.8, 152mo;
   160029; queer phenomenology of, 67, 158012,                 on conceptualization, 117-19; on emotion
   160029, 16mn33- 34; on sexuali ty, 70; on white-            paradox, 11r, "psychological constmcrion of
   ness, 16on29                                                emotion," 173n35; and situated emotion, 111,
Aizawa, Kenneth, 155037                                        141, 173035; on top-down affective: information,
Althusser, Louis, 70                                           12-1, 125 fig. 4.5
A 11ato111 y and Philosophy of Expression ru Co11-          Barsalou, Lawrence, 5, 9, 117-20, 12-1, 128; on
    nected with the Fine Arts, The, 41, 43 fig. 1.7            anger, 2s; on conceptualization, 117-19; on
Aquinas, Thomas, 14                                            emotion paradox, 1m on fear, 137, 140; and
Archaeology of Sympathy, A11, 2                                situated emotion, 111, 117-18, 140-41
Aristotle, 21, 69, 166n5; on emotion, 40, ,11; on           Bartlett, Jami, 15rn39
    hyperbole, 47; Poetics, 10. Sec also Rhetoric           basic emotions program: critiques of, 117; and
    (Aristotle)                                                Ekman, 9, 18, 30, 33 fig. 1,5, 34-35, 39, 40, 113,
Art lllstinct, The, 100, 162111                                117, 140- 41, 153018. s~e also Ekman, Paul
Asm111i11g a Bod)•, 56, 157010                              Bell. Charles, -11, -13 fig. 1.7
astonishment, 115 fig. 4.2, 116 fig. 4.3, 166n11; in        benevolence 26, 126-27
   Se11sc a11tl Sensibility, 114, 123, 125; and surprise,   Bentham, Jeremy, 58, 166118; on happiness, 58, 121,
   113, 114-15, 167m2                                          1691125; utilitarianism of, 113, 169025
176                                                                                                    IND EX

lkrlant, Lauren, 16m33; Com{'<1,sio11, 37; on com-          ogy, 82; foundational works in, 90-91; and
    passionate cons<"rvjtism. 3T. CmC'I Optimism,           phenomenology, 88-89; and sentimental
    2; on love. 12; on situations, 2                        literature, 45; and Theory of Mind, 27, 11 1. Sec
lkmanke, lkn, 166n7                                         ,,Isa literary O;irwinism; Zunshine, Lisa
Bitzer, Llord, 15on36; on constraints, 93, t63m9;        cognitive ps)'chology, 1_14
    on cxi~mce, 93, 150036, 163nt8; on rhetorical        cognitive rhetoric, 154n26
    sit ua1ion, 99                                       cognitive science, 159n21; and hcdonic psychol-
 Black Skin, White Masks, 65-66                             ogy, 59 -60; situated 1heori,·s o f, 6-7, 29; social
 Blake, William, 2; Sorrg, of lmrocmce arrd of              scenarios in, 1-2
    Expericnu, 14;n6                                     Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, 113, 166nS
 Blake's Agitation, 147n6                                Comedy of Errors, Tl,c, 36
 Booth, Wayne, 168023                                    comfort, 3, 16, 126- 28, 160029; and beauty, 20 -21;
 Bounds ofCognition, Tl1c, 155037                          as bourgeois, 16, 17; Genussmillc/, 16; in T/,e
 Bourgeois, The: &n,·een Hisrory a11d Literature,           /111ercsti11g Narrative, 54; in Sense nrul Sensibil-
    15-16                                                  ily. 26; as well-being. 17. Sec also discomfon
 Bourgeois Vim,,:s, The, 167m6                           Comprusion: 11,e Culture of Polirics and Emotion,
 Boyd, Brian, 78-79, 85, 162m; art and literature as        37
    adaptive, 81; and consilience, 82; on evocriti-      consilience. 3, 82, 84 - 86, 87, 88, 130
    cism, So, 81; on e\'olution, 88; on kin selection,   Cosmides, Leda, 88, 100
    78; on literary Darwinism, 89                        Crane, Mary Thomas, 35, 36
 brain scans, and emotion, 33-34, 41,118                 Cren1i11g Capabilirics, 16202
 brain science: of Damasio, 16202; of emotion,           Crisafi, Anthony, 16003
    33- 34, 153ru5; and rhetoric, 3                      critical race theory, 19, 139
 Bright, Timothy, 36                                     Cmcl Oprimism, 2
 Broadmann, Korbinian, 131-32                            cultural criticism, 36 - 38
 Browne, James Crichton, 15206                           Cultural Studies, 79, 83-84, 88
 Burke, Kenneth, 16, 20, 151037; on recalcitrances,      Cuthbertson, R. Andrew, 31
     163m9; on rhetoric of emotion, 156048
 Burne!, Thomas, 109                                     Damasio, Antonio, 31-32, 41, 84, 153m5, 153m9;
 Buss, David, 80, 88                                       brain science of, 162n2; and CAL, 35; on
 Butler, Judith, 70; on passionate a1tachments,            emotions and feelings, 16502; impoverished
     159027                                                Darwinism of, 35
                                                         Darwin, C harles, 17, 34 - 35, 50- 51, 87; o n artistic
Cabanac, Michel, 169n29                                     ~xpression, 155033; on emotion, 37, 152n6~
Cambridge Handbook ofSituated Cogni1ion, The,               evolutionary theory of, 29; on love, 39 - 40;
    4-5                                                     photography in, 152n6; rhetoric of emotion,
 Campos, Joseph J., 141                                     211-29. See also Expression of Emotio11s i11 Mn11
Carrett.1, Vinuent, 55, 68, 71, 157n3; on Equiano's         a11d Animals, Tl1e; literary Darwinism
   precariry, 64-65                                      Darwin's Camera, 152n8, 156n52
Carroll, Joseph, 80-81, 85                               Davidson, Cathy N., 157n3, 158013
catch trials, 117, 167m7                                 Dawkins, Richard, 87
catharsis, 10                                            Dean, Carolyn J., 129-30, 143, 174040; on reti -
Cave, Terence, 35, 154024, 156n44                           cence and empathy, 143-44
Chalm..rs, David, 44, 45                                 Dean, Howard, 117 fig. 4.4
Chandler, James: on Blake, 14706; on mixed               de Beauvoir, Simone, 56
   feelings, 15m40; on sentiment, 147n6; on              decolonization, 1490:>.4
   scntimenLll literature, 2-3                           de Man, Paul, 79
Chard, Chloe, 109                                        Derrida, Jacques, 79
Chomsky, Noam, 131                                       Descartes, 155n36
Cicero, 93, 119                                          de Waal, Frans B. M., 153n19, 162n2
Clark, Andy, 15, 44, 45; extended mind hypothesis,       Diener, Ed, 69
   16on32                                                discomfort, 7-8, 14, 53; and rhetorical situation,
Cognitive Approaches 10 Literature (CAL), 23,               20, 93; in Smtimc111al Journey, 49. See also
  .28, 35-37, 49, 77-So, 83-84, 153019; biology,            comfort
  primacy of, 85; and critical theory, 82; and           disgust, 10, 17, 33 fig. 1.5, 34, 40, 96, 113, 120, 123,
  Ekman, 18, 35-37; and evolutionary psycho!-               153m8
IND EX                                                                                                            177

Disra11r /lead111g, 86                                            91; hos1ik, 92, 97, 99, 101, 110; hostile work, 98,
Douglas, Aileen, 156n40                                           99; human, 77, 91-92, J04
Drea111i11g by rl,c !look, 90-91                               Equia no, Olaudah, 5, 14; birthplace controversy,
Dreyfus, Hubert, 15, 44 - 45, 48, 65, 15on31; on                  157n3. Sec also l11tcrcsri11g Narrative oft/re Life
   I leidegger, 161035; on Merleau-Ponty, 160028;                 ofblmrdal, £quia110, Tire
   Wl,ar Comp111ers Still Cau't Do, 15on31                     evocriticism, 78-80, 100; Boyd on, 80, 81; as
Du Bois, W. E. 13., 55, 56; on double conscious-                  remote, 83, 101. See also literary Darwinism
    ness, 19, 55                                               £volutio11, Litcra111rc & Film, 85, 87
Ducheone, G uillamc-Benjamin-Amand, 30, 31                     evolutionary psychology, 18, 34, 91; and CAL, 82;
  lig. 1.2, 32 fig. I.J, 33 fig. 1.4, 38                          and hostile work environmenls, 99-100; and
Dunlap, Knight, on si1ua1cd emotion, 118                          literature, 130, 17rn6; and mixed feelings, n6;
Du11on, Denis, wo - 101, 162n1                                    and situated emotion, 18
Dy11amic Theory of Perso11a/ity, A, 95                         Evolutionary Psychology (EP), Bo, 87, 88; and
                                                                  CAL, 82; new ep, 82, 88; orthodox, 80, 81-82
Eagleton, Terry, 16201                                         evolutionary theory, 29, 97. See also Darwin,
ecocriticism, 4, 22- 23                                           Charles; £xprcssio11 of Emotiom in Mau aud
Ecological Approach lo Visual Perceptiou, Tire,                   Auimals, 111e
   163nt6                                                      exigences: Bitzer on, 93, 150036, 163018; and
Eco110111y ofClraracrer, T/1e, 163013                             rhetorical situations, 93-95, 163m8
Ekman, Paul. 30, 124, 153m5, 153m9; on affective               £xpressio11 of Emotio11s i11 Man a11d A11imals, Tl,e,
   co mmitme nts, 40, us, 167m3; afterword lo Tire                18, 28-30, 29 fig_ 1.1, 34-35, 37-41, 153m9;
   Expre,siou, 34; basic emotions program of, 9,                  Duchenne pho1ographs in, 30, 31 fig. 1.2, 32
   18, 30, 33 fig. 1.5, 34 - 35, 39, 40, ll3, ll7, 140 - 41,      fig. 1.3, 33 fig. 1.4, 38, 15208; and emotion sci -
   153018; and CAL, 18, 35- 37; emotional hierar-                 ence, 30; and history, 39- 40; imagination in,
   chy of, 38; emo tion science of, 28; Facial Action             38-39; infants in, 50-51, 51 fig. 1.9; and rheto -
   C oding System (FACS), 30-31, 44 fig. 1.8;                     ric of emotion, 18, 37-44_ Sec also Darwin,
   impoverished Darwinism of, 35; introduction                    C harles; Ekman, Paul; evolutionary theory;
   10 The Expressiou, 30; unequivocal emotion in,                 literary Danvinism
   49-50. See also Exprcssiou of E111otio11s i11 Jvfau         Extended Mind (EM) theory, 44-45, 49
   a11d A11i111als, Tire
emotion, 1-2; a nd affect, 11- 13, 35, 149025, 16202;          Facial Action Coding System (FACS), 30-31
   Aristotle on, 40-41; and brain scans, 33-34,                Fanon, Frantz, 55; Black Skin, Wl,ite Masks, 65-66
   41, u s; brain science of, 33 - 34, 153m5; and              Fauconnier, Gilles, 113
   Darwin, 37, 152n6; ecology of, 60- 61; and                  fear, 137-41; as concept, 140; racialiud, 138-41
   feeling, 150035, 16502; and gender, u5; history             feelings: and emotion, 15on35, 16502; of freedom,
   of, 6; and indeterminacy, 4; and instability, 14;              12-13, 64-65; retroactive, 1. Sec also emotion;
   lab study of, 9; nature-nurture debate, 9-JO,                  emotion science; mixed feelings
   11; and neuroscience, 129; as reference poinl,              Feuerbach, Ludwig, 16on33
   12-13; rhetorical analysis of, 128, 16605; trans-           Fielding, Sarah, 4-5, 49,124
   actional character of, 4, 21. See also emotion              Findlay, J. N., 66
   science; mixed feelings; rhetoric of emo1ion;               Fisher, Philip, 11
   situated emotion                                            Flaubert, Gustave, 14
emotion science, 3, 141 , 174037; of Ekman, 28; and            Fodor, Jerry, 83, 89
   The Expre,siou, 30; and the humanities, 23,                 Foucault, Michel, 78
   27; and racialized fear, 139; and two-cultures              Fredrickson, Barbara, 161040
   divide, 142                                                 freedom: feeling of, 12-13, 64-65; in The /111eres1-
Emotion Studies, 12, 13, 23, 58-59; and fictionality,             i11g Narnttiv,•, 56, 64-65, 73, 158m3
   24-25; and 1wo-culture divide, 130, 140                     Freud, Sigmund, 149n30, 16605; Totem a11d 1aboo,
empathy, 130, 131, 137, 142-44, 173023; Ei11fiilr/1mg,            166
   10, 130; and money incentive, 132; and neuro-               Fusseli, Henri, 155032
   science, 129-301 137, i41-44; ilnd reticence.
   143- 44                                                     Galen, 25
E11cyclopc,lia of tire Pl,i/osop/1ia1/ Scic11ces, 160031       Gallagher, Shaun, 160031
Engels, Friedrich, 1601133                                     Gates, Henry Louis, Jr., 55
environments, 77, 95, 163m6; alTordanccs of, 92,               Gcertz, ClilTord, 4
   104; and affordancc theory. 95; and cognition,              Gwalt psychology, 17, ,is, 94, 95
                                                                                                           INDE X

Gibson, Jamc,s J., 4, 101, •Ji, 1-1Sn1s, 15-1025;           inlentional fallaq·, 21 , 68, 161037
   affordanc~ theory of, 79, 92, 9-1 - 97, 98 - 99,         l111,·n·sri,1g Nt1rratiw of rl,c Life of Olnudnh
   10; , 163016: TT1t• Ecologi.-11I Appro11.-h to Visual        Equim w, Th~, 5, 52- 55; as abolilion ist, 21, 68,
   Peruption, 163016; embodied cognition in , 91 ;             70; "almost an Englishman" siallls in, 52, 56, 58,
   on ~nvironmcnts, n , 163m6; invarianct:' crit e-             62, 68, 73; antircalism of, 1581114; attachment in,
   rion of.13; language theory of, 97- 98; monism               52, 63- 65, 67-69; bearing up in , 18 - 19, 52, 56,
   of, 98; on perception, 90; and phenomenolog)',               70 -76: Ch ristia n ity in, 54, 73-76; comfo rt in.
   89; pre-c ultural fo,;us of. 97; prelinguistic focus         54; gratitude in, 56, 63; "h appy sit uation" in, 21,
   of, 97; and situatro cognition theorr, 62                    25, 52, 57-58, 59- 60, 62 - 63, 67- 68, 75-76, 132;
Gilman, Sander L , 1s2n6                                        hybrid fo rm o f, 158n13; and identi fica tion, 68 -
Gilpin, William, 103                                            69; naming in, 71-72; patl,os in, 69; phenom-
G~the, 9                                                        enology of, 76; prevenient grace in, 57; rebirth
Goldsmith, Ste,·en, 1-17TI6                                     in, 53-54, 63-64, 74-76; rhetorical e motion
Goring, Paul, 123- 24                                           in, 68 - 69; slavery in, 18 - 19, 52-54, 62; time in,
Gothic fiction , 104 -5; dependence in , 105, 108;              52, 53-57, 63. Sec also Equiano, Olaudah
   epistemolog)' of, 105; hostile environments in ,         lllquiry foro t/ic Hw11a11 Mi11d 011 rl,c Pri11ciplcs of
   92., 97; sentimental mode of, 22, 24, 77; sus-               Commo11 Se11sr, A11, 1481115
   pense in, 105. Su aL<o sem imental literature            l11troducrio11 to Cog11iti1•e Cultural Studies, 79, 83-
Gonschall, Jonathan, 85                                         84. See also Zunshine, Lisa
Grice, Paul, Maxim of Manner, 47-48                         /11trod11ctio11 to rlie Pri11cip/c of Momls a11d Legisla -
Griffiths. Paul, -1 - 5, 10, 15, 49, 168020; on scaffold-       tions, A11, 58, 169n 25. Sec also Bentham, Jerem y
    ing, 1-11; on r.--o-cultures divide, 130                irrationalism, 25, 122 -23

 Hacking, Ian, 1;1040, 151n3 (chap. 1)                      James- Lange lheory, 13
 Harding, D. \\'., 167m6                                    Jameso n, Frederic, 149n25
 Han, H. L A., 170033                                       jealousy, 40, 65, 87
 Hanman, Saidiya V., 17, 19                                 Johnson, Mark, 91
 Haugeland, John, 15                                        Johnson, Samuel, 68
 hedooic psrchology, 19-20, 26, 52- 53, 58, 59 - 60 ,       Joyce, Ja mes, 164n30
   69; and Bentham, 58, 121, 269025; and cogni-
   tive science, 59 - 60; and systematic enors.             Kagan, Jerome, 34, 116, 153m 5, 17105
    159n19                                                  Kahnema n, Daniel, 19, 26 -27, 128; and behavioral
 Heerwagen, Judith H., 100                                     economics, n1; on bias and persuasion, 26,
 Hq;el, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, 55, 56, 67,                   60, 121- 22; on cognitive scie nce, 159n 2ti on
    156n42; EnC)"Clopedia ofrhe Philosopl,ical                 emotional amplification, 57- 58; o n experience,
    Sciences,, 16on31 ; extended mind hypothesis,              69; good / bad bipola ri ty o f, 59-60 , 169029;
   16onn31-32; master-slave (lord-bondsman)                    and hedonic psycho logy, 52, 58, 68; on loss
   relationship in , 65- 6,; and Merleau-Pomy,                 aversion , 123; on mixed feelings, 60, 120 -22,
   65-66, 161n35; Phmomenology ofSpirit, 65 - 67,              123 - 24, 169029; on perceived abnormality,
   170035; System of Ethical Life, 160032                      124 -26; prospect theory of, 168024; reference
 Heidegger, Martin, 2., 137, 151n37, 16rn35; and situ -        points in, 121-2.2 i and rhetorical analysis, 61;
   ated cognition theory, 62                                   on skilled negotiators, 121-22, 127; su rprise,
heredity, 85                                                   phenomenology of, 124 - 25; on utilitarianism,
Herman, David, 35, 101 ; cognitive approach of,                122; and utility, 120; on well -being reports, 69
   164030; on novelists as Umwdr researchers,               Kant. Immanuel, 55, 61
   101; Umwelt r=rch of, 23                                 Kierkegaard, S0ren, 150031
Hobbes, Thomas, 11                                          Kofflca , Kun, 94, 165n33
Hofelich, Alicia J., 142, 143                               Kramnick, Johnathan, 35; and aesthetics of pres·
Hogan, Patrick Colm, 90, 91                                   ence, 154n25; on literary Darwinism, 81- 82, 87;
Honore, Tony, 17onn                                           on " uneasiness" in Locke, 150034
Horn, Laurence, 47 - 48                                     Kuhn, Thomas, 150031
Howard, June, 35, 46
How 1l1e Mind Works, 100, 156n41                            Lacan, Jacques, 156n42
human rights, 66-67, 149n24                                 l.akoff, George, 23, 36, 91, 154n26, 163m6; on
Hume, David, 17onn                                             Gibson, 94
Hu~serl, Edmund, 150033, 158n12                             Laocoon, 41-42, 42 fig. 1.6, 155032
IND ll X                                                                                                     179

Lectr,rcs 011 AeHlrcrics, 17, 96                            mirror-neuron theory. 10, 119, 142
LeDoux, Joseph , 35, 159n21 , 162n2                         mixed feelings, 111; in Austen, 2, 25-26, 111, 116 -
Lessi ng, Gottho ld Ephraim, 41, 155n33                        17, 119 - 20, 123-24, 125; Chandler on, 15rn40;
Lewin, Kurt, 17, 110; on demand characteristics,              computerized images of, 111- 12, ru fig. 4.1;
    164n22; Dy m1mic Theory of Perso11aliry, A, 95;           and evolutionary psychology, 116; Kahneman
   'environments in, 95; " hopeless situation" of,            on, 60, 120 - 22, 123 - 24, 1691129; and marriage,
    96, 97, 106; on power, 108; on valences, 94, 95,          170037; and reference points, 120-22; rhctori•
    108. 1641122                                              cal analysis of, 128; as situation, 119
Lewis, C. S., 167                                           Mo/cw/es of E11101io11, 84
Lewis, Matthew, 22, 77                                      Monk, T!re, 22, n, 97
Lcwontin, Richard, 85-86                                    Morelli, Franco, 15-17; Bourgeois, The, 15-16;
Leys, Ruth, 11                                                 Distant Reading, 86; Lit Lab of, 86; on paradox
Lie to Me, 20                                                 of comfort, 16
Lipps, Theodor, 10                                          Mori, Masahiro, 165113
literary Darwinism, 22 -23, 35, 45, n-83; Boyd on,          Moten, Fred, 19, 56, 1581111
    89; and cultural critiq ue, 79; and gene-culture        Mo11ming Happi11css, 1681123
    coevolution, 80; Kramnick on, 81 - 82, 87; logi-        M11clr Ado about Nothi11g, 4
    cal fallacies of, 81, 86 - 87; phenomenology of,        Murasaki Shikibu, 78
    87; testability of, 83; Zunshine on, 82. Sec also       Mysteries of Udolpho, 10
    Darwin, Charles; evocriticism                           Mysterious Morlrcr, Tire, 102, ro3
Locke, John, 1501134
logical fallacies: affirm ing the co nsequent, 81,          narrative fiction: and evolut ion, 83-84; and
    86; of literary Darwinism , 81, 86 - 87; pathetic           human environments, n ;as orientation
    fallacy. 46, 89 - 90, 109; undistributed middle,            device, 70
    86                                                      Nawml Contract, Tire, 149n29
Long Rcvo/11rro11, Tire, 12- 13, 163119                     Natural History of Negation, A, 47
love, 4 - 6. 12, 49; in Austen, 84 - 85, 114-15, 120,       negation: in Austen, 46, 47-48, 120; rhetorical
    123, 130; Danvin on , 39- 40; God's love. 14; and           function of, 47; in Sterne, 46-47
    m arriage, 4, 5-6; in Proust, 65; romantic, 5- 6,       Nelson, Cary, 84
    10 , 40, 84, 130; sentimental, 8, 1481113; in Sterne,   N erley Abbey (painting), 102 fig. 3.2
    8, 1481114                                              Neural S11blime, The, 84
Love's Labo11r Lost, 11                                     neurophenomenology, 1741137. See also
Lukacs, Georg, 16                                              phenomenology
                                                            neuroscience, 145; and abstraction, 131; affect
Madame Bovary, 14                                              in, 12,142; brain localization in, 133-34, 135;
Maki11g of Romantic Love, Tire, 6, 1481113                     and emotion, 129; and empathy, 129-30, 137,
Mm, of Fedi11g, Tire, 49,124                                   141-44; funding of, 136-37; journal impact
Marx, Karl, 43, 1601133                                        in, 132; and mass media, 133; money incentive
Marxism , 48, 67, 78, 16m35                                    in, 131, 132, 136; and perceptual context, 133;
Massumi, Brian, 12, 149n25; on emotions, 165n2                 and r:icism, 137; and reverse inference, 134-37;
Mcc loskey, Deidre N., 1671116, 1681123                        and sense of self, 134, 135; specialization in,
McIntyre, Alister, 116-17                                      134; technical limitations of, 131; technocratic
McKenzie, Henry, 49, 124                                       hierarchy of, 137
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, 19, 56, 150031; on attach-          Ngai, Sianne, 10, 11; Our Acstl,cric Caregorics,
   ment, 64 - 65; on the body, 64; on disorien-                158n14; on Sterne, 158nq; Ugly Feeli11gs, 10-11
   tation, 1581112; on freedom, 65; and Hegel,              Nietzsche, Friedrich, 78
   65-66, 16m35; intentional arc of, 52, 54, 61, 67;        Noe, Alva, 15, 18, 19, 29, 76, 1541125; on anachment,
   Plre110111enology of Pcrccptio11, 52, 157119; and           63-64; on bearing, 69-70, 1611141; on brain
   queer involvements, 67; on sexuality, 70, 157119;           scan science, 33-34; 0111 of Our Heads, 18, 19,
   situated cognition theory of, 52, 65, 16on28,               29, 52, 61-62; and perception, 62; rhetoric of
   1651133; and unity of the senses, 54-55                     experience, 61-62, 1591125; situated cognition
Metaphors We Live By, 91                                       thcor1· or, 52, 62-63; on situations, 44, 45, 50;
Mill, John Stuart, 166118                                      Varieties of Prese11cc, 61
Miller, Dale, 26- 27; on emotional amplification,           novel reading, as bourgeois, 14, 1631113
   57-58; surprise, phenomenology of, 124-25                Nussbaum, Martha, 3, 13; capability approach of,
mind reading. See Theory of Mind (ToMJ                         78, 162112; on emotion, 162112


                                                                                                                    i
                                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                    l
                                                                                                                    I
                                                                                                                    I
180                                                                                                     t ND EX

On frmal,· BO<I}' fa:pcri,·ria, 56, 157n9                racism, 144 ; and causality, 138, 140; and cdcbrity,
011 Nafrf! and Scntim.-ntal Po.•try•. 151n40                140; and emotion, 41; .tnd familiarity, 139- 40;
On lhl' Origi11 ofStorie_<, 78, 16m1. S.·c aL,o Boyd,       institutional, 139; Modern Racism Scale, 138;
   Brian                                                    and neuroscience, 137; as social, 138 - 39
Orians, Gordon H., 100                                   Radcliffe, t\nn, 22, n, 100; /Hysterics of Udolpho,
Our A.:stl,,·tic Cat~ories, 158n14                          84; supernatural in, 105-6, 109; as Um wclt
Out of Our Het1ds, 18. 19, 29. 52, 61-62. &c also           researcher. 101. Sec al;o Gothic lic1ion;
   N~, Alva                                                 Romann· of tire Fort·st, The
Oxford Ha11dbool: ofCognilivc Literary Studies, 82       Rcadi11g Mi11ds. 155026
                                                         Rao,wrucri,ig tl,e Cog,iitivc World, 149n27, 1551137
  Pam,•/,~ 12-1, 148n13                                  Reddy, \\"llliam M., 21, 17on37; on love, 6 -7, 10;
  Parable; for the \'irtrta~ 16502                          Mal:i11g of Ro111a11ric Low, T/,e, 6, 148m3; on
  P:irkcr, Patricia, 36                                     sentimental literature, 148m3
 Pase.ii, Michael Henry. 56                              Reid, Thomas, 148m5
 P=io11; a11d Interests. The, 17on30                     Rejlander, Oscar Gustav, 32 fig. 1.3, 152n8, 156n52
 Passi om of the Soul. Tire, 155036                      rhetoric: and affordance theory, 22, 92-93; and
 Paster, Gail Kem, 36                                       brain science, 3; and causation, 17on33; cogni•
  pathos. 21; in Tire lntcre.sring Narraliw, 69; in         tive, 154n26; as field guide, 22; goals of, 62;
      Sen1imcntal Journey, 45-46                            litotes. 47; paradiastole, 107, 122, 169028; as
  Pt:acham, Henry. 1:u.. 169n28                             persuasion, 61; and sentimental litera1ure, 2.
  Person and the Si1uatio11. Tltr, 164n~                    Sec also rhe1oric of e motion
  Pen, Candace, 84                                       Rhetoric(Aristolle), 3, 47, 151n37; emolion i11, 40 -
  Phelps. Elizabeth A., 137- 40, 141, 145                   41; nega1i,·e affordance in, 91 - 92, 96 - 97, 101.

  phenomenology. 137, 158n12, 16rn35; of being. 15;         See also Aristotle; rhetoric; rhe toric of emotion
      and EM, 44; of emotion, 9-10; of n.. forercst -    rhetorical situations, 1son36; Bitzer on, 99; and
      ing Narmrive, 76; of literary Dan,;nisrn, 87;         mixed emotional s tates, 113; as uncomfortable,
      and literature, 154n24; neurophenomenology,           20, 93. See also rhe1oric of e motion; si tuations
      174n37                                             rhetorical studies, 123, 139
 Phenomenology of Perceprion. 52, 157n9                  rhetorical theory, 20-22, 93, 155n26
 Phenomenology of Spirit ( Plrenomenology of             rhetoric of emotion, 10 1 13, 20 - 24, 2.8, 112 - 23,
      Mind), 65- 67, 17on3;                                 1561148; in Austen, 113, 116- 17, 124; and capital,
 Phikbus. 166n5                                             169n27; catharsis, 10; and Dan-,in, 28-29; a nd
 Pinker, Steven, 5, 45, 84 -85, 130, 171n6; on evolu-        The Expression, 18, 37- 44; in Tire Jntercsr-
     tionary psychology, 100; on fiction, 101               i11g N arrative, 68-69; in li1erary ficlion, 24;
 Plato, 122., 166n5                                         mimetic, 10, 23-24; and mixed feelings, 128;
Political Emotions. 162n2                                   performative, 10, 14; projective, 10; prosthetic,
Popc, Alcxander,47                                          10, 14; and situations, 2, 23; systematic, 11; vol-
Portrait ofthe Artisr a.s a Young Man, A, 164n30            untary, 11. Sec also rhetoric; rhetorical situations
Powell, Colin, 138                                       Rhetoric ofSemibility in Eiglrtce11tlt-Cerr111ry
Prelude. The, 89                                            Cu lture, The, 123-24
Preston, Stephanie, 9, 18. 27, 87, 136; empathy          Richardson , Alan, 84
    studies of, 137, 141-42. 143 - 44                    Richardson, Samuel, 124, 148n13
pride, 1. 39. 103, 114, 153n18                           Rietveld, Erik, 95
Principles of Gestalt Psychology, 94                     Robinson, Douglas, 16on32
Prodger. Phillip, 156n52                                 Robinson C rusoe, 16
Protestant Ethic, T/1e, 16                               Romance of tire Forest, The, 22, 24, 102- 10;
Proust. Marcel, 65. 90                                     affordances in, 106- 8; asylum in, 105, 106;
psychoanalytic criticism, 79                               hostile environmenl in, 92, 100, 101, 102, 103-
Psychological Construction of Emotion, Tire. 173n35        4 ; imag>nation in, 24; indeterminacy in, 109;
Puckett, Kent, 14                                           paradias1ole in, 107; religious sensibility in,
                                                            108 -9; self-deception in, 105. Sec also Gothic
Queer Phenomenology. 15on33, 158n12, 16on29,               fiction; Radcliffe, Ann
  161n33. See also Ahmed, Sara                           Roscnwe:in, Barbara, 21
                                                         Roughgarden, Joan, so
race,: and black-white bias, 27; critical race theory,   Rousseau, Jean -Jacques, 9, 78
   19, 139; and ~lavery, 27, 64 - 65, 139                Rowling,/ . K., 78
                                                                                                                     181
 INDEX

 Russell, llertrand, ,16                                         divide, 140- 45. Sec also emotion; rherorical
 ltyle, G ilbert, 116 - 17, 167n16                               situations; rhetoric of emotion; situations
                                                             Sit11ated11css: or, Why We Keep Sayirrg Where We're
sadness, 1, 10, 13, 33 fig. 1.5, 44, 75, 142, 153n18             Co111i11g From, 1491130
Salamo n , Gayle, 56; on gender ambiguity, 157nio            situations: and comfort, 3; and emotional insla -
Sanc hez-Eppler, Karen, 46                                      bilily, 2; mixed feelings as, 119; Noc on, 44, 45,
Savio, Mario, 93, 94                                            50; and rhetoric, 2, 23; sentimental, 8 - 9. See
Scara ntino, Andrea, 4 - 5, 10, 15, 49, 168n2oi on              also rhetorical situations; rhetoric of emo1ion;
    affo rdances, 9 2; on Gibsonian affordance                  situated emotion
    tltc ory, 98 - 99; on scaffoldin g, 141; on 1wo-         Skinner, B. F., 131
    cultures d ivide, 130                                    Skinner, Quentin, 122
Scar ry, Elaine, 23, 35; and percepwal cognilion,            slavery, 17; and freedom, 65; in Tiu: /111ercstir1g
    90- 91                                                      Narra1ivr, 18 - 19, 52-54, 62; master-slave rela-
Schiller, l'ried rich , 1511140                                 tionship, 64 - 65. See also i,111:resti11g Narrative
Sch warl, N o rbert, 59                                         of 1/1c Life of Ola11da/1 Eq11ia110, The
Scoll, Walter, 105                                           Smith, Adam, 122, 1551130; on sympathy, 2
Searle, Joh n, 48                                            Snow, C. P.. 129
Secret Hisrory, of E111orio11, Tire. 3                       social Darwinism, 78 - 79
Scci11g tire /rrsanc, 152116                                 Social Psychology, 134, 1641124
self, 144; and d iscomforl, 56; and double                   So11gs of /1111oce11ce a11d of Experie11ce, 147n6
    co nsciousness, 55; a nd hopelessness, 96; self-         Soni, Vivasvan 1 168023
    consciousness, 66-67; se lf-deception , 85, 105,         Sopra,10s, Tire, 78
    130; sense o f, 134, 135                                 Sorabji, Richard, 3
Sen , Amartya , 162n 2                                      Souls ofBlack Folks, 11re, 55. See also Du Bois, W. E. B.
Sense and Sc11srbility, 113-15; astonishment in, 114,       Spenser, Edmund, 40
    123, 125; co mfo rt in , 26; irrationalism in, 123;     Spols~-y. Ellen, 83, 84, 88
    m ixed feelings in, 25- 26, 111, 116-17, 119- 20,       Star Trek, 50
    123-2-4, 125; reference points in, 12-4; relative       Sterne, Laurence, 2, 6-9, 11, 24, 45-49, 124,
    value in , 1701135; romantic love in, 130. See also        1541125; love in, 8, 1481114; Tristram S/1andy,
    Auslen, Jane                                               1481114. See also Set11ime111al Jo1m1ey through
se n1imen1ality, 8-9, 35                                        France a11d Italy, A
Sc11timc11tal Journey t/1ro11gli France and Italy, A,       Stone, Lawrence, 5- 6
    11, 14 - 15, 45- 47, 4S- 49, 124, 1561148; discom -     Strack, Fritz, 59
    fort in, 49; pathos in , 45- 46. Sec also S1erne ,      sublime, 10, 20 - 21, 102, 109, 1561148
     Laurence                                               S11pi!rsizir1g the Mind, -14
se ntime nlal lite rature, 2, 25 - 26, 111, 148m3; and      surprise: and astonishment , 113, 114-15,
    CA L, 45; and rhetoric, 12-4; and science of emo-          1671112; phenomenology of, 124-25. See also
    tion, 18; and well- being. 3                               astonishment
se ntimen lal novel, as research domain , 25 - 26, 111      sympathy, 2, 3, 10, 26, 35, 39, 85, 124, 127, 130,
Serres, Mic hel, on environment, 1-191129                      142-.43, 1551130, 1561152, 174n40
Sexton, Jared, 19, 1621142                                  System of E1/1ical Life, 1601132
Shakespeare, William, 11, 36, 109; Darwin on, 40
Sl,akespearc's Brain, 35                                    Tel/11ris T/1eona Sacra, 109
shame, 11, 14, 74, 92, 99, 120, 126-27, 1531118             terror, 4, 10, 16, 21, 2-1-25, 31 fig. 1.2, 41 , 49, 52- 53.
Shannon, Claude Elwood, 97, 98 fig. 3.1                         57-58, 63, 69, 102, 105-7, 120, 1511137
Simpson, David, 1491130                                     Tess of the d'Urbcn-illcs.. 90
situated cognition, 15, 16-17, 19-20, 118-19, 139;          Theory of Mind (ToM), 88, 91, 114, 163m3; and
    and Heidegger, 62; and lite rature, 23; and                 CAL, 27, 111; and reverse inference, 135-.16. Sec
    Merleau- Ponty, 52, 65, 1601128, 1651133; and               also Zunshinc, Lisa
    NOi!, 52, 62- 63; and phenomenology, 89; and            TI,eory of tl1e Novd, Tl1r, 16
    rhe torical analysis, 61                                Tl1i11ki11g with Literature, 1541124, 1561144
situa1ed emotion, 3- 4, 6 - 7, 18, 26 - 27, 48 - 51, 111,   Thompson, Evan, 15, 44
    117 fig. •H, 118, 141- 45; and 13arrelt, 111, 141,      Thrailkill, Jane F., 35, 36
    171112, 1731135; and Darsalou, 111, 117-18, 140-41;     lime: and allachm.-nt/kding, 63 - 64; ,md
    and computational models of mind, 18, 84; in                emotion, 166115; in "f/,r lmcr,·sti11g Narrari,•,·,
    evolutionary psychology, 18; and two-cultur~s               52, 53- 57, 63; queer lcmporality, 1~81114
                                                                                               INDEX

Tomasdlo, Michael, 87                                well-being. 19-20, 53; as bourgeois, 16; comfort
Tooby, John. 88, 100                                     as, 17; in Equiano, 19; post-WWII, 149024;
Torm, at1d Taboo, 166                                    and smtiment,11 literature, 3; subjective
Triple Heli:c. Th,•. 85-86                                reports of, 59; and unccrl.iinty, 106; and
Trivers, Roben, 85, 88, 130                               u1ili1arianism, 17
Turner, Mark, 36, 113, 1540~6                        \\'ell-Bei11g ( Kahneman) , 59, 159m6. See also
T,·erslq·. Amos, 120; on Joss aversion, 123               Kahncman, Daniel
Twain, Mark. 36                                      \Vhat Compwers Still Cm,'r Do, 150031
n.-o-cultures divide, 129-30, 140, 17101; and as-    Wl,at is Emotio11? History, Memures, a11d Mc1111-
   sumed incommensurability, 109, 144; and col-        i11g;., 153m5
   laboration, 145; and consilience, 130, 144; and   Wheeler, Michael, 15, 44
   emotion science, 142; and fear studies. 137-41;   Wl,y \Ve Read Ficrion, 89. See also Z unshinc, Lisa
   re,•erse inference problem, 130                   Williams, Raymond, 12- 13, 84, 16309
                                                     Wilson, E. 0., 84, 85, 87, 130, 144
 Uexkull, Jakob \"On, 95, 101; Urnwdt theory of,     Wilson-Mendenhall, C. D ., 140
    15, IOI                                          Winckelmann, J. J., 41 , 155032
 Ugly Fuling;., 10-11                                Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 95 - 96, 118, 137, 140; Lee·
 uncannr valley, 16503                                 tures 011 Aesrl,ctics, 17, 96
 utilitarianism, 16607, 169025; in Austen. m, 119-   Wollstonecraft, Mary, 26, 76; on Eq uia no, 75; A
    20. 121; of Bentham. 113, 169n25; Kahneman on.      Vi11dirnrio11 of 11,c Rights of Woman, 126 - 28
    Ill; and well-being, 17                          Work of Fic1io11, The, 83

 Variencs of Pr=nce, 61. See also Noc, Alva          Young, Iris Marion, 56
 Vehement Passion<, The. 11
Vermeule, Blakey, 79; and mind reading, 114          Zunshine, Lisa, 27, 46, 84, 91- 92; on cognitive
Vindication of the Rights of \Voma11, A, 126-28        literary theory, 83- 84; on cognitive !urn, 79;
Virgil.41                                              on consilience, 82; on culture, 88; on lite rary
Voltaire, 22                                           anthropomorphism, 46, 89, 91, 104, 109; on
VygotsJq,, uv, 137, 141                                literary Darwinism, 82; on nature in literature,
                                                       89 - 91, 101,104; on pathetic fallacy, 46, 89,
\\falpole, Horace, 22, 77, 102, 103                    109; and Theory of Mind, 27, 91, 114, 163m3;
Warburg, Aby, 154m9                                    Wiry We Read Fictio11, 89. See also Cognitive
\'/caver, Warren, 97                                   Approaches to Literature (CAL); Theory of
Webb, Jim, 117, 117 fig. 4.4                           Mind(ToM)
Weber, Ma.x, 15-16                                   Zupancic, Alcnka, 156042
Weinberg, Jack, 93
