                        Advances in the History of Rhetoric




                        ISSN: 1536-2426 (Print) 1936-0835 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/uahr20




                 Looking Into Aristotle's Eyes: Toward a Theory of
                 Rhetorical Vision

                 Debra Hawhee

                 To cite this article: Debra Hawhee (2011) Looking Into Aristotle's Eyes: Toward a
                 Theory of Rhetorical Vision, Advances in the History of Rhetoric, 14:2, 139-165, DOI:
                 10.1080/15362426.2011.613288

                 To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15362426.2011.613288




                         Published online: 11 Oct 2011.



                         Submit your article to this journal



                         Article views: 655



                         View related articles



                         Citing articles: 3 View citing articles




                                        Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
                               http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=uahr20

Download by: [The UC Irvine Libraries]                                                                      Date: 08 February 2016, At: 17:42
                                                                    Advances in the History of Rhetoric, 14:139–165, 2011
                                                                    Copyright © American Society for the History of Rhetoric
                                                                    ISSN: 1536-2426 print/1936-0835 online
                                                                    DOI: 10.1080/15362426.2011.613288




                                                                    Looking Into Aristotle’s Eyes: Toward a Theory
                                                                                 of Rhetorical Vision

                                                                                                     DEBRA HAWHEE
                                                                                                  Pennsylvania State University
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                          This article culls a theory of rhetorical vision from Aristotle’s
                                                                          Rhetoric by examining the cluster of terms that bears on his theory
                                                                          of visual style. Rhetorical vision stands apart from but complements
                                                                          visual rhetoric in that it attends to the rhetorical and linguistic
                                                                          conjuring of visual images—what contemporary neuroscientists
                                                                          call visual imagery—and can even affect direct perception. The
                                                                          article concludes by examining rhetorical vision in Demosthenes’
                                                                          Epitaphios. At stake in this investigation is the visible and visual
                                                                          liveliness of rhetoric and its ability to alter sense perception.

                                                                          “In everything I say there will be vision.”—Oedipus to the Stranger,
                                                                          Oedipus at Kolonos l.74
                                                                          “And, as we were saying before, visions appear to us even when our
                                                                          eyes are shut.”—Aristotle, De Anima 428a.15–16

                                                                    When Sophocles’ Oedipus assures the Stranger at Kolonos that as a blind
                                                                    man he (Oedipus) can still be useful; he does so by pointing out that there is
                                                                    vision in all that he says. It is tempting to read this line as yet more evidence
                                                                    of a Sophoclean—even a uniquely Greek—fascination with the visual.1 And
                                                                    while that is probably an accurate reading, to stop there would be to miss
                                                                    the theoretical implications of Oedipus’ observation: words—in this case,
                                                                    Oedipus’ words—can stand in for or facilitate vision; they can help others
                                                                    see, horōnta.
                                                                         Writing in the century after Sophocles, Aristotle had much to say
                                                                    about the unique and multidirectional relationships among vision, the


                                                                        The author wishes to thank the following people for their engagements with this article:
                                                                    Richard Graff, Ned O’Gorman, John Marsh, and anonymous readers.
                                                                        Address correspondence to Debra Hawhee, Pennsylvania State University, Department
                                                                    of English, 134 Burrowes Building, University Park, PA 16802, USA. E-mail: hawhee@psu.edu



                                                                                                                139
                                                                    140                                 D. Hawhee

                                                                    eyes, and words. In the Poetics, for example, Aristotle invokes Sophocles
                                                                    when he instructs dramatists to “elaborate the plot by language (kai tē
                                                                    lexei sunapergazesthai) and by keeping the material before the eyes (pro
                                                                    ommatōn tithemenon) as much as possible” (1987, 17.l.1.1455a).2 Yet the
                                                                    idea of words as visual apparatus is by no means limited to the ancient
                                                                    stage.3 Indeed, this communicative synesthesia marks one of several cru-
                                                                    cial places where Aristotle’s Poetics overlaps with his Rhetoric, producing
                                                                    both arts as wordy arts that tap into bodily and visual faculties.4 A few his-
                                                                    torians of rhetoric, including Aristotle’s main rhetorical translator, George
                                                                    Kennedy, have begun to notice in the Rhetoric such visual-rhetorical con-
                                                                    cepts as phantasia, bringing-before-the-eyes, and energeia or activity.5 It
                                                                    is my aim to augment their efforts by drawing together these and other
                                                                    concepts in order to form a dynamic theory of what might be called rhetor-
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                    ical vision. Rhetorical vision, I contend, is not merely a passing notion in
                                                                    Aristotle’s Rhetoric, one that ties the Rhetoric to the more animistic and
                                                                    sense-related treatises in the Aristotelian corpus—in other words, De Anima
                                                                    and the Parva Naturalia. As a theory that appears in all three books of the
                                                                    Rhetoric—beginning with a discussion of pleasure in book I, tying vision to
                                                                    the pathē in book II, and culminating in a robust discussion of visual style
                                                                    in book III—rhetorical vision lends unity to the treatise’s famously various
                                                                    parts.6 More broadly, though, rhetorical vision—and rhetors’ ability to sum-
                                                                    mon that vision—invigorates the art of rhetoric in ways that scholars have
                                                                    yet to recognize.
                                                                         By offering the idea of rhetorical vision, I mean to notice the ways
                                                                    that language interacts with vision directly. At stake in such a considera-
                                                                    tion is rhetoric’s role in sense perception and the importance of developing
                                                                    a rhetorical style that infuses words with perceivable movement and life,
                                                                    with visualizable action.7 Rhetorical vision stands apart from, but is com-
                                                                    plementary to, the perhaps more familiar term visual rhetoric. While visual
                                                                    rhetoric focuses on the rhetorical force of plastic, photographic, televisual,
                                                                    and other visual arts and media to consider the rhetorical work of the visual,
                                                                    rhetorical vision considers the visual work of rhetoric and language, the com-
                                                                    plex ways that words—oral or written—form perception. Put most simply,
                                                                    through rhetorical vision, words come to life.
                                                                         Analyses in visual rhetoric tend to focus on material objects such as
                                                                    paintings, film, photographs, and posters, thereby limiting the visual to an
                                                                    encounter with pictorial objects.8 Such a restrictive definition of the visual
                                                                    tends to omit considerations of visual capacity itself. A recent essay by visual
                                                                    rhetoric scholar Cara Finnegan, however, stands as an important exception
                                                                    with its twofold definition of “image” as “both pictorial representation (i.e.,
                                                                    a concrete image such as a photograph) as well as the broader understand-
                                                                    ing of image as mental picture, appearance, or product of the imagination”
                                                                    (2008, 14). Both parts of Finnegan’s definition are necessary; otherwise,
                                                                    theorists are left with an object-centered notion of vision that holds lit-
                                                                    tle regard for the physical and rhetorical processes that occur on the part
                                                                                                       Aristotle’s Eyes                            141

                                                                    of viewers. This article therefore explores the importance of visual capac-
                                                                    ity, that which aligns with what contemporary neuroscientists call mental
                                                                    imagery, and what Aristotle called phantasia.9,10 A robust theory of rhetori-
                                                                    cal vision, I contend, will show how existing theories—of visual rhetoric and
                                                                    even of rhetoric more generally—will remain impoverished until they begin
                                                                    to attend more explicitly to the way words and the physical senses interact.
                                                                          It is important to say at the outset that rhetorical vision does not strictly
                                                                    operate on the level of metaphor, with “seeing” serving as a metaphori-
                                                                    cal placeholder for semantic understanding, as in, “Ah, now I see what
                                                                    you mean.” For Aristotle, while knowing and seeing are intimately bound,
                                                                    rhetorical vision nevertheless occurs very near and sometimes at the level
                                                                    of direct sensory perception, and I will attempt, first, to show how this
                                                                    is so and, second, to explain why a nonmetaphorical notion of rhetorical
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                    vision might help enliven rhetorical theory and criticism. All of this can be
                                                                    achieved—preliminarily, at least—by looking into the eyes of Aristotle.
                                                                          Most of this article, then, is devoted to elucidating the faculty of
                                                                    phantasia, which I argue is the central faculty for rhetorical vision, a crucial
                                                                    yet under-considered component of Aristotle’s theory of rhetoric. Phantasia
                                                                    is a complex sort of visuality that shifts throughout the Rhetoric, at times
                                                                    operating on a strictly social level and at other times feeding directly into
                                                                    a theory of rhetorical style. A full understanding of the rhetorical features
                                                                    of phantasia is not possible without attention to the visual concepts and
                                                                    associated faculties that feed, tap into, or otherwise entwine with phantasia,
                                                                    such as pleasure, density, the pathē, bringing-before-the-eyes, and energeia,
                                                                    and so these notions figure prominently in the following analysis as well.
                                                                    After a connective discussion of these concepts, I conclude by briefly exam-
                                                                    ining a speech that elucidates Aristotle’s principles through its performance:
                                                                    Demosthenes’ Epitaphios, or Funeral Oration. To consider the material and
                                                                    political contours of Demosthenes’ rhetorical situation is to better understand
                                                                    the pressing need for an art and theory of rhetorical vision.


                                                                                            PHANTASIA AND RHETORIC

                                                                    The scholarship on phantasia is extensive, and an exhaustive treatment of
                                                                    it is beyond the scope of this article. Even so, it is necessary to offer an
                                                                    overview of this visual faculty, its definitions and contexts, with an eye to
                                                                    the qualities and impulses phantasia shares with rhetoric. As several scholars
                                                                    have noted, phantasia is rather difficult to translate into English. The most
                                                                    common translation—imagination—has been called into question; classi-
                                                                    cal scholars such as Malcolm Schofield (1992, 251), Gerard Watson (1982,
                                                                    100), and philosophers Victor Caston (1996, 20–21) and Deborah Modrak
                                                                    (1986, 47n1) discuss the ill fit of the term imagination and opt, as I will, to
                                                                    leave the word untranslated after discussing its component meanings.11 As a
                                                                    translation of phantasia, imagination would be sufficient if it were possible
                                                                    142                                      D. Hawhee

                                                                    to disarticulate the word from its romantic (interior, private) associations,
                                                                    to stress instead the “image” part of imagination.12 Modrak and Martha
                                                                    Nussbaum (1985) both put forward competing but equally compelling read-
                                                                    ings of Aristotelian phantasia as a crucial part of the meaning-making
                                                                    process. Modrak defines Aristotelian phantasia as the “faculty through which
                                                                    images are presented, stored, and recalled” (2001, 227). Phantasia, that is,
                                                                    includes but goes beyond sense perception (Everson 1997, 166); it involves
                                                                    movement, merges with desire, and strains toward action and judgment.
                                                                    In De Anima’s canonical account of phantasia, Aristotle observes:

                                                                          If phantasia is (apart from any metaphorical sense of the word) the
                                                                          process by which we say that an image (phantasma) is presented
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                          (gignesthai) to us, it is one of those faculties or states of mind by which
                                                                          we judge and are either right or wrong. Such are sensation, opinion,
                                                                          knowledge, and intelligence. It is clear from the following considerations
                                                                          that phantasia is not sensation (aisthēsis). Sensation is either potential or
                                                                          actual, e.g., either sight or seeing, but phantasia occurs when neither of
                                                                          these is present, as when objects are seen in dreams. (3.3.428a.1–8)


                                                                    Noteworthy in this passage is Aristotle’s categorization of phantasia as a
                                                                    faculty (dunamis) on the order of sensation, opinion, and so on, but as
                                                                    distinct from each of these. What gets less attention in this passage, how-
                                                                    ever, is the particular way that phantasia hovers around the categories of
                                                                    sensation, opinion, knowledge, and intelligence: these are interconnected
                                                                    means by which judgments get made. A few lines later, Aristotle notes that
                                                                    “phantasia is different from either perceiving or thinking, though it is not
                                                                    found without perception, nor judgment without it” (trans. Everson 1997,
                                                                    166, 3.3.427b.14–16). Phantasia is not the same thing as judgment; but it
                                                                    nevertheless functions as judgment’s “intermediary” (Everson, 1997, 166),
                                                                    providing the materials on which judgments are built (Watson 1982, 108),
                                                                    and forming “a link between perception and thought” (Modrak 2001, 230).
                                                                    In Nussbaum’s words, “Phantasia ties abstract thought to concrete percepti-
                                                                    ble objects or situations” (1985, 265): it traffics between the immaterial and
                                                                    the material. Through phantasia, the less-than-visible becomes visible, as
                                                                    Aristotle’s (somewhat dubious) etymology suggests, “Phantasia is derived
                                                                    from phaos (light),” because, he observes, “without light it is impossible to
                                                                    see” (De Anima, 3.3.429a.4–5).
                                                                         The previous long passage from De Anima also mentions the main
                                                                    distinction between phantasia and aisthēsis, or direct perception. Put most
                                                                    simply, the faculty of phantasia is activated when viewable matter is not
                                                                    immediately at hand and must be otherwise conjured, as with dreams,
                                                                    delusions, and memories. Aristotle believes that other visual phenomena
                                                                    requiring one to exercise one’s phantasia—to phantasize—include a reflec-
                                                                    tion in water or in a mirror; the bright trace that remains after staring at the
                                                                                                     Aristotle’s Eyes                          143

                                                                    sun and then closing the eyes; a hazy figure in the distance that may or may
                                                                    not be a man.
                                                                          What these instances of phantasia have in common is a kind of
                                                                    fuzziness—ancient mirrors, we must remember, were roundish disks made
                                                                    of burnished metal (usually bronze) that were usually convex or concave,
                                                                    and so they were not as sharply reflective as the glass mirrors used sub-
                                                                    sequently (Richter 1915, 251). The example of a man in the distance is
                                                                    interesting because it involves what would otherwise be considered direct
                                                                    perception; only the distance and the limits of direct vision draw on
                                                                    phantasia’s capacity to conjure as an aid in recognition. Phantasia there-
                                                                    fore enters the picture when vision happens at some remove or is otherwise
                                                                    limited (as with a bronze mirror). Everson refers to phantasia as “percep-
                                                                    tual thought” (1997, 210), and Modrak notes that phantasia encompasses
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                    a range of cognitive activity “from sensory illusions to practical decision-
                                                                    making” (1987, 99). The vision of phantasia, by definition, is fuzzy and
                                                                    uncertain, and so it is no surprise that it appears with some frequency in
                                                                    Aristotle’s Rhetoric, where actions and events described by rhetors tend to
                                                                    be blurry and (at least temporally) distant. The upshot of this component def-
                                                                    inition, and the prominence of phantasia and other related words derived
                                                                    from phainein in the Rhetoric, is this: words themselves, not unlike faces
                                                                    reflected in burnished bronze or a distant moving torch, can activate the
                                                                    faculty of phantasia.
                                                                          Aristotle hints at a connection between phantasia and speech in De
                                                                    Anima when he observes that “not every sound made by a living crea-
                                                                    ture is a voice (for one can make a sound even with the tongue, or as
                                                                    in coughing), but that which even causes the impact, must have a soul,
                                                                    and use some phantasias; for the voice is a sound which means something”
                                                                    (2.8.420b.29–33). This passage explicitly links phantasia to voice as opposed
                                                                    to sound or noise (psophos), and thereby to the faculty of meaning-making,
                                                                    sēmantikos.13 The role of phantasia in the context of voice, language,
                                                                    and rhetoric is significantly expanded in the Rhetoric, as the next section
                                                                    demonstrates.
                                                                          The fit between phantasia and rhetoric has not been taken up in clas-
                                                                    sical scholarship, where the Rhetoric is only lightly consulted in favor of
                                                                    Aristotle’s animistic texts (De Anima and the treatises on senses, dream-
                                                                    ing, and memory contained in Parva Naturalia and De Motu Animalium).
                                                                    Apart from Modrak’s fascinating discussion of phantasia and language, sug-
                                                                    gestions of the connection between phantasia and rhetoric only flicker
                                                                    in the margins of scholarship in classics and philosophy.14 Even so, per-
                                                                    ception, interpretation, desire, action, and judgment all cluster around the
                                                                    faculty of phantasia, thereby positioning phantasia as potentially one of
                                                                    the most important critical faculties for the art of rhetoric. If rhetorical
                                                                    scholarship is bracketed, rhetoric has been by and large omitted from
                                                                    the scholarly catalogues of phantasia’s contexts, which are often limited
                                                                    144                                 D. Hawhee

                                                                    to dreams, delusions, and memories. Gerard Watson (1982) comes tan-
                                                                    talizingly close to acknowledging rhetoric as an important context for
                                                                    phantasia when he concludes a discussion of phantasia’s central role
                                                                    in an animal’s memory system, “by adding, even though Aristotle does
                                                                    not do so here, that the most convenient way of sharing such a system
                                                                    between human beings would be language” (111). Aristotle’s discussions
                                                                    of phantasia in De Memoria, De Anima, and De Motu Animalium com-
                                                                    bine with his discussion of phantasia in the Rhetoric to prove Watson
                                                                    right: if phantasia is the faculty by which images can be both conjured
                                                                    and communicated, and if it figures prominently in desire formation, the
                                                                    moving of affections, and judgment itself, then rhetoric stands as a major
                                                                    context for the exercise of phantasia, for the transmission of phantasmata,
                                                                    images.
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                          Despite this tantalizing linkage between phantasia and rhetoric, discus-
                                                                    sions of phantasia in the context of rhetorical studies are also surprisingly
                                                                    rare. Ned O’Gorman (2005) offers the most thorough and head-on examina-
                                                                    tion of phantasia in the context of epideictic discourse and, following Frede
                                                                    (1992), uses the phrase “after-image” to discuss phantasia, which is partic-
                                                                    ularly apt in the instance of memory. Quintilian, in his Institutes of Oratory,
                                                                    reads the plural (phantasiai) as visiones, or “visions,” a translation that cap-
                                                                    tures phantasia’s rather haunting, fleeting nature. More recently, Michele
                                                                    Kennerly (2010) culls from Aristotle a civic of phantasia framed by a lively
                                                                    theory of rhetorical transport and kinesis.
                                                                          As O’Gorman’s and Kennerly’s studies indicate, phantasia, the fuzzy,
                                                                    distant, or indirect visual faculty, is a crucial faculty for rhetoric. Whereas
                                                                    the psychological treatises considered by the scholars in fields other than
                                                                    rhetoric describe the contexts for and characteristics of phantasia, the
                                                                    Rhetoric, by contrast, contains an applied discussion of phantasia. An exam-
                                                                    ination of phantasia and its cluster of visual concepts in the Rhetoric
                                                                    establishes the crucial roles played by rhetorical vision in each of the trea-
                                                                    tise’s three books, even as it undoes the assumption, apparently made even
                                                                    by George Kennedy, that a notion of rhetorical vision is strictly metaphorical,
                                                                    with “seeing” standing in for understanding.15


                                                                                        PHANTASIA AND THE RHETORIC

                                                                    If scholars in classics and philosophy consult the Rhetoric for their discus-
                                                                    sions of phantasia, they usually refer to the line in book I, chapter 11, where
                                                                    Aristotle mentions phantasia’s relationship to aisthēsis, the well-known term
                                                                    for direct perception or sensation: “Phantasia is a kind of weak sensa-
                                                                    tion,” phantasia estin asthēsis tis asthenēs (1.11.1370a.28–29).16 Examining
                                                                    this line in isolation and reading it as a kind of oracular commentary about
                                                                    phantasia’s essence, however, eclipses the larger point of phantasia vis-à-vis
                                                                                                        Aristotle’s Eyes                                145

                                                                    rhetoric: one cannot begin to account for human motives, desires, or suasion
                                                                    more generally without reference to the way people see, or phantasia.
                                                                         It is no coincidence, then, that the famous line about phantasia appears
                                                                    in the chapter offering topics about pleasure in the context of judicial
                                                                    rhetoric, that is, how pleasure relates to motives of those who commit
                                                                    wrongdoings. Aristotle makes clear the purpose of I.11 at the end of the
                                                                    preceding chapter when he notes, “In short, all things that people do of
                                                                    their own volition are either goods or apparent goods or pleasures or appar-
                                                                    ent pleasures” (1.10.1369b.18–20), and so “things that are advantageous
                                                                    and pleasurable, their number and nature, should therefore be understood”
                                                                    (29–31). In addition to providing useful commentary for inventing argu-
                                                                    ments in a judicial context, the chapter also details phantasia’s relationship
                                                                    to suasion and desire more generally, as indicated by an explanatory remark
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                    inserted before the famous line about phantasia being a weak percep-
                                                                    tion: “[I call things] in accordance with reason what people long for on
                                                                    the basis of persuasion; for they desire to see and possess many things
                                                                    after hearing about them and being persuaded [that they are pleasurable]”
                                                                    (1.11.1370a.25–27; emphasis in Kennedy). Phantasia therefore becomes
                                                                    central to this discussion of pleasure because of the desire to see and
                                                                    possess—theasthai kai ktēsasthai—those things that are deemed pleasurable
                                                                    by others. That desire is facilitated by the fuzzy vision of phantasia as pre-
                                                                    sented through words. Rhetors therefore ought to understand the range of
                                                                    apparent pleasures (hē phainomena hēdea) according to Aristotle. An under-
                                                                    standing of pleasure, that is, is tightly yoked to an understanding of how
                                                                    things appear as pleasurable. The short chapter on pleasure and apparent
                                                                    pleasure in fact contains five references to phantasia and therefore offers an
                                                                    instructive applied account of phantasia in relation to rhetoric and human
                                                                    motives. The account of apparent pleasure and motives in book I is of course
                                                                    complementary to the account of emotions in book II, as Aristotle points out
                                                                    at the end of chapter 10, and which I discuss later in this article.17
                                                                         Phantasia first appears in the pleasure chapter as part of a complex
                                                                    syllogism beginning at the aforementioned line 27:

                                                                         Since to be pleased consists in perceiving (en tō aisthanesthai) a certain
                                                                         emotion (pathous), and since phantasia is a kind of weak perception,
                                                                         and since some kind of phantasia of what a person remembers or hopes
                                                                         is likely to remain in his memory and hopes—if this is the case, it is clear
                                                                         that pleasures come simultaneously to those who are remembering and
                                                                         hoping, since there is perception there, too. (1370a.27–31)

                                                                    While this passage helps most scholars clarify Aristotelian phantasia’s status
                                                                    vis-à-vis aesthēsis, the passage does much more than that. First, it folds time
                                                                    into the distinction. Just as spatial distance causes vision to grow fuzzier,
                                                                    thereby tapping the faculty of phantasia, temporal distance from the object
                                                                    146                                 D. Hawhee

                                                                    of perception also necessarily calls on phantasia. It is also important to
                                                                    note what is getting perceived in this instance: not a man or a dog but a
                                                                    certain emotion, tinos pathous. Such pleasurable pathē are not of course
                                                                    limited to the brighter or happier pathē in Aristotle’s catalog (e.g., calm-
                                                                    ness or kindliness), but they also (and especially) include the pleasure of
                                                                    recalling an intensely negative pathē, such as flying into a rage. The tem-
                                                                    poral distance is in fact what enables the remove necessary for one to
                                                                    glean pleasure from a memory of a sorrowful or terrifying moment. “The
                                                                    cause of this,” observes Aristotle, “is that not having an evil is also plea-
                                                                    surable” (1.11.1370b.7). As Aristotle puts it in De Anima, “In phantasia we
                                                                    are like spectators looking at something dreadful or encouraging in a pic-
                                                                    ture” (3.3.427b.23–25): there is visual contact with the past event, and with
                                                                    the formerly intense pathē, but such contact nevertheless happens at some
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                    remove and can therefore be admired or even enjoyed.
                                                                          Much more is going on in the “weak perception” passage than is typ-
                                                                    ically discussed. Phantasia brings pleasure with distance, and its time is,
                                                                    like the time of rhetoric, the past, the present, the future, or (more com-
                                                                    monly) a mixture of these three. A good example of how the phantasia
                                                                    of memory mingles with the prevailing pathos and perceptions of the now
                                                                    appears in the discussion of mourning: “For the grief applies to what is
                                                                    not there, but pleasure to remembering and, in a way, seeing [the dead]
                                                                    and what he used to do and what he was like” (1.11.1370b.25–26). Here
                                                                    Aristotle offers lines from the Iliad (23.108) and the Odyssey (4.183) follow-
                                                                    ing the funerary speeches of Patroclus and Odysseus, respectively: “Thus he
                                                                    spoke, and raised in them all the sweet longing of tears” (1.11.1370b.27).
                                                                    The example here indicates Aristotle’s belief that rhetoric—in this case a for-
                                                                    mal funeral oration—is often the medium by which phantasia and pathē,
                                                                    and phantasia of pathē, mix and mingle simultaneously, forming a complex
                                                                    and at times compound set of competing but often complementary visions,
                                                                    thereby intensifying the pathē overall.
                                                                          Phantasia appears again, later in the chapter, in key discussions of
                                                                    perceived superiority (hyperochē), first in the context of victory: “And win-
                                                                    ning is pleasurable not only to those fond of it but to all; for there is a
                                                                    phantasia of superiority for which all have desire either mildly or strongly”
                                                                    (1.11.1370b.33–34), and then in the context of friendship, where “the good
                                                                    is present to someone in his phantasia, which all who perceive desire”
                                                                    (1371a.18–20). In both of these instances, which again link phantasia to
                                                                    desire, Freese translates phantasia aptly as impression, thereby capturing
                                                                    the physicality of phantasia that Aristotle discusses in De Memoria: “One
                                                                    must consider the affection which is produced by sensation in the soul,
                                                                    and in that part of the body which contains the soul . . . as a kind of
                                                                    picture; for the stimulus produced impresses a sort of likeness of the per-
                                                                    cept, just as when men seal with signet rings” (1975, 1.450a26.450b1) (see
                                                                    Carruthers 2008, 372n5). The phantasiai of victory and goodness are in this
                                                                                                      Aristotle’s Eyes                           147

                                                                    way stamped onto the soul or vital life force, leaving a visible and lasting
                                                                    imprint, a kind of picture, zōgraphēma. One with such an impression there-
                                                                    fore repeatedly pictures oneself as good, or superior, as the case may be,
                                                                    and this pressed-in, visual mode of self-perception is not metaphorical. It is
                                                                    material.
                                                                          In the same chapter, Aristotle also invokes phantasia in the more gen-
                                                                    eral context of honor circulation: “And honor and reputation are among the
                                                                    pleasantest things, through each person’s phantasia that he has the quali-
                                                                    ties of an important person; and all the more [so] when others say so who,
                                                                    he thinks, tell the truth” (1371a.8–10). In this instance, phantasia is again
                                                                    sutured to rhetoric, especially to the ēthos of the person giving an account
                                                                    of one’s reputation whose saying heightens the seeing. The reputation of the
                                                                    speaker or witness can therefore clarify the phantasia.18 Aristotle goes on at
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                    some length about who is qualified to speak reliably about one’s reputation,
                                                                    discounting those who live at a distance in favor of fellow citizens who are
                                                                    more able to attest to someone’s regular behavior, the foolish in favor of
                                                                    the wise, and the few in favor of the many. Those named in the passage
                                                                    are, according to Aristotle, “more likely to tell the truth than their opposites,
                                                                    since no one pays attention to the honor or reputation accorded by those he
                                                                    much looks down on, such as babies or small animals” (1.11.1371a.13–16).
                                                                    The use of babies or animals as those who can witness but not reliably tes-
                                                                    tify is worth noting, because it appears again in a passage from book II that
                                                                    I will discuss later.
                                                                          It is well known to scholars of phantasia that animals possess the fac-
                                                                    ulty of phantasia; Aristotle makes this clear in De Anima (3.3.427b.7–8).
                                                                    Kennedy glosses this line in the Rhetoric in particular by noting that babies
                                                                    and animals are unable to speak about someone’s reputation (90n202) and
                                                                    so are unable to bolster one’s reputation: they can see but they cannot
                                                                    say, and this crucial rhetorical act of vouching enlivens—and as important,
                                                                    spreads—the images that will cohere around someone’s reputation. Multiple
                                                                    acts of vouching are also important for Aristotle, as indicated by his favoring
                                                                    of the many over the few: the more images that can be gathered under one’s
                                                                    honor, the better. Indeed, so many testimonies, operating as they do on a
                                                                    quasi-visual register, create yet another visual effect that is best described as
                                                                    density.
                                                                          In chapter 14 of book I, still elaborating the topics related to judicial
                                                                    rhetoric and wrongdoing, Aristotle describes how rhetors might heighten
                                                                    the perception of criminal activities: “Rhetorical techniques adaptable to
                                                                    this are [to say] that a person has broken many norms of justice and
                                                                    gone beyond [a single crime], for example, [breaking] oaths, handshakes,
                                                                    promises, marriage vows; for this is a heaping up (huperochē) of wrongs”
                                                                    (1.14.1375a.8–11). This “heaping” strategy involves a near-visual component
                                                                    itself in that actions are piled on actions. The word that Kennedy translates
                                                                    in chapter 14 as “heaping up” (huperochē) appears repeatedly in book I
                                                                    148                                    D. Hawhee

                                                                    in its more customary meaning of superiority or excess. Hyperochē appears
                                                                    as well in Aristotle’s discussion of amplification (auxēsis), which he claims
                                                                    “is most at home in [speeches] that are epideictic” (1.9.1368a40.27) for, as
                                                                    a figure of speech, amplification “aims to show huperochē” (1.9.1368a.23).
                                                                    Huperochē combines the familiar prefix huper- (English hyper-) meaning
                                                                    excessive, above, or beyond, with the root -ochē, which means support or
                                                                    prop, so the word itself denotes something like excessive support. The word
                                                                    conveys a strong sense of superiority, eminence, or prominence and there-
                                                                    fore is often translated (as in the previous passages about reputation) as
                                                                    superiority. With specific reference to language, it moves toward periphra-
                                                                    sis or prolixity (Liddell, Scott, and Jones 1996, 1867), and so in a rhetorical
                                                                    context, superiority is captured through excess—a “heaping up” or piling on
                                                                    of active descriptions. To produce overwhelming evidence of wrongdoing
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                    or excellence is to crowd out images of other kinds of action. In rhetoric,
                                                                    the word huperochē therefore has something of a built-in visual compo-
                                                                    nent of its own, one that captures density because of the way multiple
                                                                    images—especially phantasic images—can be seen and held in the mind
                                                                    simultaneously.
                                                                          Aristotle discusses the phenomenon of drawing several phantasic
                                                                    images into one dense and complex purview in De Anima, when developing
                                                                    a notion of deliberative phantasia, phantasia bouleutikē:

                                                                          Phantasia in the form of sense (aisthētikē) is found, as we have said,
                                                                          in all animals, but deliberative phantasia only in the calculative (logis-
                                                                          tikois); for to decide whether one shall do this or that calls at once for
                                                                          calculation, and one must measure by a single standard; for one pur-
                                                                          sues the greater good. This implies the ability to combine several images
                                                                          (pleionōn phantasmatōn) into one. (3.11.434a.6–11)

                                                                    This sort of calculative weighing of multiple phantasic images—deliberative
                                                                    phantasia—is also mentioned in an earlier passage: “Sometimes by means
                                                                    of the images or thoughts in the soul, just as if it were seeing, it [the soul]
                                                                    calculates and plans for the future in view of the present” (3.7.431b.6–8).
                                                                    According to Nussbaum, who otherwise argues against a purely imagistic
                                                                    reading of phantasia, this passage suggests on the contrary that “deliberative
                                                                    phantasia can also involve picturing, or at least some sort of envisag-
                                                                    ing” (1985, 264). Writing in 1935, philosopher Harry Wolfson discusses
                                                                    phantasia bouleutikē as a unique combination of imagining and reasoning
                                                                    in humans, which results in what he calls a “compositive sort of imagina-
                                                                    tion” (92) or phantasia.19 Deliberative phantasia, the ability to construct
                                                                    a composite image involving images of past, present, and future events,
                                                                    encompasses all three branches of rhetoric that Aristotle describes in the
                                                                    Rhetoric (deliberative, judicial, epideictic) and is almost certainly the faculty
                                                                    at work that enables both rhetor and audience to process the “heaping up”
                                                                                                       Aristotle’s Eyes                              149

                                                                    (huperochē) of wrongs, thereby forming a composite sketch of an alleged
                                                                    criminal’s—or a revered person’s—actions.
                                                                        More generally, then, deliberative phantasia approximates the com-
                                                                    parative approach recommended with the technique of amplification,
                                                                    auxēsis:

                                                                         Thus, even if there is no comparison with the famous, one should com-
                                                                         pare [the person praised] with the many, since superiority [even over
                                                                         them] seems to denote excellence. In general, among the classes of
                                                                         things common to all speeches, amplification is most at home in those
                                                                         that are epideictic; for these take up actions that are agreed upon, so
                                                                         that what remains is to clothe the actions with greatness and beauty. But
                                                                         paradigms are best in deliberative speeches; for we judge future things
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                         by predicting them from past ones.” (1.9.1368a.25–30)

                                                                    When Aristotle elaborates epideictic speeches as those which “take up
                                                                    actions that are agreed upon, so that what remains is to clothe the actions
                                                                    with greatness (megethos) and beauty,” it is not a stretch to say that megethos,
                                                                    a word of loftiness, also invokes measures, and frequently excessive ones: in
                                                                    Homeric epic, for example, it always denotes stature, and in astronomy the
                                                                    word indicates a magnitude of stars. So the very task of epideictic or judicial
                                                                    rhetoric is to rhetorically—through a host of images furnished by memory,
                                                                    by vivid comparisons, and projected into the future—produce magnitude,
                                                                    thereby achieving huperochē or density by calling up multiple images, and
                                                                    piling on excessive details.20 This is why Aristotle, as discussed earlier, favors
                                                                    the praise of many rather than few.
                                                                         The appearance of phantasia in book I of the Rhetoric establishes its
                                                                    importance as a faculty for rhetorical interaction. In the instances discussed
                                                                    so far, phantasia functions as the visual capacity that can set actions next
                                                                    to actions and that partners with logical capacities to feed into a delibera-
                                                                    tive process. Phantasia traffics in desire, belief, and action, sharing crucial
                                                                    patterns with rhetoric.


                                                                           DISPOSITIONAL VISION: PHANTASIA AND THE PATHĒ

                                                                    The discussion of auxēsis, huperochē, and phantasia toward the end of
                                                                    book I bleeds into the book II’s treatment of pathos and ēthos, with book
                                                                    II’s opening gambit following the transition from book I:

                                                                         But since rhetoric is concerned with making a judgment (people judge
                                                                         what is said in deliberation, and judicial proceedings are also a judg-
                                                                         ment), it is necessary not only to look at the argument, that it may be
                                                                         demonstrative and persuasive but also [for the speaker] to construct a
                                                                    150                                     D. Hawhee

                                                                          view of himself as a certain kind of person and to prepare the judge;
                                                                          for it makes much difference in regard to persuasion (especially in
                                                                          deliberations but also in trials) that the speaker seem to be (phainesthai)
                                                                          a certain kind of person and that his hearers suppose him to be disposed
                                                                          toward them in a certain way and in addition if they, too, happen to be
                                                                          disposed (echein) in a certain way [favorably or unfavorably to him]. For
                                                                          the speaker to seem to have certain qualities is more useful in deliber-
                                                                          ation; for the audience to be disposed in a certain way [is more useful]
                                                                          in lawsuits; for things do not seem the same (ou gar tauta phainetai)
                                                                          to those who are friendly and those who are hostile, nor [the same]
                                                                          to the angry and the calm but either altogether different or different in
                                                                          importance. (2.1.1377b20–1378a1)
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                    This passage presents the extra-logical aspects of rhetoric as a layering of
                                                                    dispositions on dispositions, echontes on echontes, a meeting of appear-
                                                                    ances. The first chapter of book II is replete with various forms of the verb
                                                                    phainein: to show, to disclose, to bring to light, to appear. It is one of
                                                                    the verbs from which the verbal noun phantasia is derived, and its various
                                                                    forms in turn locate the action of appearing with rhetoric, audience, and
                                                                    judge alike. As the final line of this passage suggests, such appearances,
                                                                    created through a combination of words and actions, are frequently fil-
                                                                    tered through pathē, the feeling side of rhetoric. Because the pathē are seen
                                                                    through phantasia—recall from earlier the lasting impressions or phantasiai
                                                                    left by affections or pathē—the idea of rhetorical vision figures prominently
                                                                    in book II as well, most notably in the instances of anger and shame.
                                                                          Phantasia figures into Aristotle’s famous definition of anger in
                                                                    chapter 2: “Let anger be [defined as] desire, accompanied by [mental and
                                                                    physical] distress, for apparent retaliation because of an apparent slight that
                                                                    was directed, without justification, against oneself or those near to one”
                                                                    (2.2.1378a.30–32). At the heart of this definition is phainomenēs/n, one
                                                                    of the verbs from which phantasia is derived. The definition twice turns
                                                                    on this notion of perception-as-interpretation (Nussbaum’s [1985] preferred
                                                                    reading of phantasia) insofar as the slight and the desired retaliation need to
                                                                    appear as such in order for anger to be present. This strong sense of appear-
                                                                    ance and the relative weakness of the word apparent here is likely why
                                                                    Kennedy chose to translate phainomenēs as conspicuous in his translation’s
                                                                    first edition.21
                                                                          After defining anger, Aristotle moves rather quickly to pathos’s ties to
                                                                    pleasure, the hope of retaliation leads to “a kind of pleasure . . . because peo-
                                                                    ple dwell in their minds on retaliating; then the phantasia that occurs creates
                                                                    pleasure, as in the case of dreams” (2.2.1378b.8–10). This vivid, dreamlike
                                                                    state that anger invokes rests on double perceptions: perception that one has
                                                                    been wronged and the desire for visible or perceivable retaliation. Retaliation
                                                                    in private, though pleasurable to imagine, will not suffice: anger, as Aristotle
                                                                                                      Aristotle’s Eyes                            151

                                                                    makes quite clear, is at once personal and public, and therefore depends on
                                                                    the visible world of external relations.
                                                                          Shame offers an even better example than anger of how phantasia and
                                                                    pathē interact, because it could not exist outside a matrix of phantasic visi-
                                                                    bility. Here is Aristotle: “Since shame is phantasia about a loss of reputation
                                                                    and for its own sake, not for its results, and since no one cares about rep-
                                                                    utation [in the abstract] but on account of those who hold an opinion of
                                                                    him, necessarily a person feels shame toward those whose opinion he takes
                                                                    account of” (2.6.1384a.21–24). This passage echoes the long passage from
                                                                    book I, chapter 12, considered earlier, in which Aristotle enumerates the
                                                                    kinds of people qualified to expound upon one’s reputation. In the discus-
                                                                    sion of shame, it matters both where and before whom the shameful acts are
                                                                    committed, for people “feel more shame at things done before these people’s
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                    eyes (ophthalmois) and in the open; hence, too, the proverb ‘Shame is in the
                                                                    eyes.’” For this reason, Aristotle continues, “people feel more shame before
                                                                    those who are going to be with them and those watching them, because in
                                                                    both cases they are ‘in’ their eyes” (2.6.13974a.33–35). Here once again, the
                                                                    vision of phantasia mingles with direct visual perception: the witnessing of
                                                                    the act is observed by the actor who in turn perceives or phantasizes the
                                                                    witnessing itself as loss of reputation. The doer of the shameful act is “in” the
                                                                    eyes—or line of sight—of those whose judgment matters. As Daniel Gross
                                                                    observes of this chapter, “Shame as Aristotle describes it is irreducibly social”
                                                                    (2006, 41),22 and I would add that this is because it is also irreducibly visual
                                                                    in that it must be visible: shame is transmitted socially through the eyes of
                                                                    others into the faculty of phantasia—perceptions layer onto perceptions,
                                                                    dispositions on dispositions, shameful actions on actions.
                                                                          The visibility of shame has a crucial rhetorical dimension as well, as
                                                                    Aristotle notes that people feel more shame “before those inclined to tell
                                                                    about it to many others (kai tous exaggeltikous pollois); for not to tell the tale
                                                                    is no different from not thinking it [a fault]” (2.6.5–8). The word exaggeltik-
                                                                    ous means to proclaim or to tell out, and so it is not a mere telling (which
                                                                    would be aggeltikous, sans the ex-), but a broadcast of sorts, to many oth-
                                                                    ers, pollois. Here again, the perceived loss of reputation depends on the
                                                                    perceived likelihood that someone will broadcast one’s shameful actions.
                                                                    Again, the saying heightens the seeing, in this case by spreading tales of the
                                                                    shameful act witnessed.
                                                                          Later in the passage, Aristotle reiterates this point when he observes that
                                                                    “on the whole” people “are not ashamed before those whose reputation of
                                                                    telling the truth they much look down on (no one feels shame before babies
                                                                    and small animals)” (2.6.1384b.22–24). Once again, babies and animals stand
                                                                    in for those who are without the capacity for speech. Just as he mobilized
                                                                    babies and small animals in his discussion of honor circulation in book I,
                                                                    Aristotle returns to them as the limit cases for those who are able to shame
                                                                    someone.23 Shame is therefore simultaneously in the eyes and in the mouths
                                                                    152                                    D. Hawhee

                                                                    of others. In book II, then, phantasia moves closer to the way Nussbaum
                                                                    (1985) figures it—as interpretation, but it is interpretation that is grafted onto
                                                                    direct perception: rhetorical vision depends upon both simultaneously.
                                                                          If books I and II establish that so much of rhetoric—desire, pleasure,
                                                                    the pathē—depends upon phantasia, book III shows rhetors how to tap
                                                                    this faculty with language. That is, book III, the book most concerned with
                                                                    words qua words, is where everything falls together: a cluster of related
                                                                    visual terms is introduced and explained, a robust theory of rhetorical vision
                                                                    takes shape, and the potential vividness of words itself comes into sharp
                                                                    focus.


                                                                                      RHETORICAL VISION THROUGH LEXIS
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                    Book III’s discussion of metaphor contains a (relatively) rare mention of a
                                                                    sophist, this one called Licymnius, whom Plato mentions in the Phaedrus as
                                                                    having written a treatise on how to make beautiful words, poiēs ineupeias
                                                                    (Phaedrus, 267c2). Of Licymnius, Aristotle writes, “The source of the
                                                                    metaphor should be something beautiful (kai apo kalōn); verbal beauty
                                                                    (kallos de onomatos), as Licymnius says, is in the sound or in the sense, and
                                                                    ugliness the same” (3.2.1405b.5–7). Licymnius’s idea of beautiful language
                                                                    leads Aristotle to refute another sophist, Bryson, who asserted that words
                                                                    with similar meanings can be easily substituted for one another. “This is
                                                                    false,” Aristotle responds. “One word is more proper than another and more
                                                                    like the object signified and more adapted to make the thing appear ‘before
                                                                    the eyes,’” (poieinto pragma pro ommatōn) (12). The beauty of words there-
                                                                    fore lies in their appeal to the senses of sight, hearing, or both. Aristotle
                                                                    concludes the discussion begun with reference to Licymnius by emphasizing
                                                                    the importance of perception to successful metaphors, citing Homer:

                                                                          These are sources from which metaphors should be taken: from the
                                                                          beautiful either in sound (phōnē) or in meaning (dunamei) or in visual-
                                                                          ization (opsei) or in some other form of sense perception (aisthēsei).
                                                                          It makes a difference whether the dawn is called “rosy-fingered” or
                                                                          “purple-fingered” or worse still, “red-fingered.” (17–20)

                                                                    The sensations mentioned in this passage are direct as opposed to strictly
                                                                    phantasic.24 Opsei, for example, is a form of the verb horaō, which means
                                                                    “to see” in the physical sense, and aisthēsei of course derives from aisthēsis,
                                                                    which is counterposed to phantasia in book I’s “weak perception” passage.
                                                                    Even so, the interpretive perception invoked by the words “rosy-fingered
                                                                    dawn” would no doubt fall into the category of phantasia; and yet Aristotle’s
                                                                    language in book II begins to move to the sense organs for its discussion
                                                                    of style and perception. The examples from Homer help to cinch the point:
                                                                                                         Aristotle’s Eyes                                 153

                                                                    unlike “rosy-fingered,” a “red-fingered dawn” would be harsh on the eyes
                                                                    and, perhaps simultaneously, the ears.
                                                                         As Sara Newman has demonstrated, this sort of bringing-before-the-
                                                                    eyes “helps metaphors, and thus rhetoric, to achieve their desired effects by
                                                                    prompting audiences to visualize images before them” (2002, 8–9). The idea
                                                                    of bringing-before-the-eyes rests not only with creating good and sensuous
                                                                    metaphors (though that is one of its crucial functions to be sure); it goes
                                                                    further, partnering with metaphor to apply to style more generally, as is
                                                                    clear in the discussion of asteia or urbanity in chapter 10. There, Aristotle
                                                                    comments that urbanity is achieved through “bringing-before-the-eyes [pro
                                                                    ommatōn poiein]; for things should be seen as being done rather than as
                                                                    going to be done” (3.10.1410b.33–35). As the discussion of pro ommatōn
                                                                    poiein reveals, at stake in bringing-before-the-eyes is not merely the change
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                    from future to present tense, but the animated gathering of both future
                                                                    and past images into the now by rendering them lively, vivid, and kinetic.
                                                                    Chapter 10 ends with a flurry of examples that shows metaphor partnered to
                                                                    bringing-before-the-eyes. In the words of Athenian general Iphicrates, “My
                                                                    path of words is through the midst of Chares’ actions” (1411b.1–3), Aristotle
                                                                    locates metaphor in the language of the path and, in “through the midst,”
                                                                    a bringing-before-the-eyes. When thinking of the phrase through the midst
                                                                    as an aid to visualization, it helps to recall Aristotle’s use of hyperochē to
                                                                    describe the creation of a dense heap of actions. Iphicrates’ phrase “through
                                                                    the midst of Chares’ actions” achieves a similar effect, and here the words
                                                                    themselves cut a path through them; they help organize—and make more
                                                                    visible—the pile. He also offers as an example of before-the-eyes Isocrates’
                                                                    too-flattering characterization of the Persians in Panegyricus “‘in every way
                                                                    practicing lowly thinking’; for ‘to practice’ is to increase something, auxein”
                                                                    (11–12). In this instance, as with the words cutting “through the midst,”
                                                                    bringing-before-the-eyes reaches back to auxēsis in that it achieves a kind
                                                                    of visual accumulation.
                                                                         In chapter 11, Aristotle backs up and offers a definition of bringing-
                                                                    before-the-eyes as well as an account of “what makes this occur”
                                                                    (3.11.1411b.22–23): “I call those things ‘before-the-eyes’ that signify things
                                                                    engaged in activity.” The word for “activity” here is a form of energeia. Not
                                                                    all metaphor features energeia, though, as he makes clear straightaway:

                                                                         For example to say that a good man is “foursquare” is a metaphor . . . but
                                                                         it does not signify energeia. On the other hand, the phrase “having his
                                                                         prime of life in full bloom” is energeia, as is “you, like a free-ranging ani-
                                                                         mal” and “now then the Greeks darting forward on their feet.” Darting is
                                                                         actualization and metaphor; for he means “quickly.” (3.11.1411b.26–32)

                                                                    A description such as “foursquare” invokes geometrical dimensions and is
                                                                    somewhat flat and lifeless, but the remaining descriptions either discuss life
                                                                    154                                     D. Hawhee

                                                                    directly or depict kinetic styles of movement, roving and quick. The distinc-
                                                                    tion between metaphor sans energeia and metaphor partnered to energeia
                                                                    makes all the difference for stimulating the eyes of hearers. Energeia, in
                                                                    Aristotelian philosophy, is opposed to dunamis, potential or capacity, and as
                                                                    he observes in the Metaphysics, it names something like physical presence:
                                                                    “Energeia means the presence of the thing” (9.5.1048a.32–34). Similarly, in
                                                                    the context of rhetorical style, energeia approximates its English cognate,
                                                                    energy, as evidenced by Aristotle’s own energetic illustrative discussion of
                                                                    Homer:

                                                                          In all his work he gains his fame by creating activity (energeian), for
                                                                          example, in the following:
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                          Then to the plain rolled the ruthless stone, and “the arrow flew” and
                                                                          [also of an arrow] “eager to fly” and [of spears] “They stood in the ground
                                                                          longing to take their fill of flesh,” and “The point sped eagerly through
                                                                          his breast.” In all of these something seems living through being actual-
                                                                          ized; for being “ruthless” and longing” and the other examples constitute
                                                                          energeia. (3.11.1411b.33–34–1412a.1–5)

                                                                    With such vivid descriptions, the zipping and quivering arrows can’t help but
                                                                    be visualized as such. Aristotle’s lively praise of Homeric style continues, cul-
                                                                    minating with this observation: “He makes everything move and live, and
                                                                    energeia is motion” (1412a.9–10). Movement and life, kinēsis and zōos, are
                                                                    what confer rhetorical presence; such a lively style therefore pours words
                                                                    as lively images into the eyes, creating “presence” and giving the impres-
                                                                    sion that the description is now.25 That impression of course resides with
                                                                    phantasia.
                                                                         The lifeblood of lexis, bringing-before-the-eyes and energeia, therefore
                                                                    stand in book III as the leading stylistic strategies for tapping phantasia
                                                                    and stirring the pathē. In a commentary on metaphor, classical philosopher
                                                                    Richard Moran points out that energeia occurs as much in the audience as
                                                                    it does in or around the metaphorical subject (1996, 393), and in order to
                                                                    stress the importance of what he calls the “imagistic” over the “discursive”
                                                                    in this context, Moran turns to Kenneth Burke, whom he reads as “echoing
                                                                    Aristotle’s language of ‘setting before the eyes’” (1996, 394). He offers a long
                                                                    quotation from A Rhetoric of Motives in which Burke, referring obliquely to
                                                                    Aristotle, begins to theorize how rhetorical vision works. Here is an excerpt
                                                                    from the Burke passage that Moran quotes at length:

                                                                          There is a difference between an abstract term naming the “idea” of, say,
                                                                          security, and a concrete image designed to stand for this idea, and to
                                                                          “place it before our very eyes.” For one thing, if the image employs the
                                                                          full resources of the imagination, it will not represent merely one idea,
                                                                          but will contain a whole bundle of principles, even ones that would be
                                                                                                       Aristotle’s Eyes                              155

                                                                         mutually contradictory if reduced to their purely ideational equivalents.
                                                                         (Burke [1950] 1969, 86–87; Moran 1996, 394; emphasis added)

                                                                    Though he does not use the term, Moran offers a reading of Burke’s account
                                                                    that aligns nicely with deliberative phantasia previously discussed. “In pre-
                                                                    senting his audience with an image for contemplation,” writes Moran, “the
                                                                    speaker appears to put them in the position of working out the meaning of
                                                                    a phenomenon rather than in the position of believing or disbelieving some-
                                                                    thing they are being told” (1996, 395). As a result of this multi-sided image
                                                                    engagement, Moran observes that, when something is brought before the
                                                                    eyes, “the mind of the hearer is provoked, set into motion, and engaged
                                                                    imaginatively with the metaphor. Energeia is thus not only on the side
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                    of what is depicted, but what is depicted is specifically figured as a liv-
                                                                    ing thing demanding some set of responses from the audience” (1996,
                                                                    395–396). The production of rhetorical vision, in other words, occurs on
                                                                    the part of the audience as a result of the “bundle” of ideas contained
                                                                    in the image. What is more, when considered in the context of deliber-
                                                                    ative phantasia as the connecting of multiple images, if each image, to
                                                                    use Burke’s words, “contains a whole bundle of principles,” then what
                                                                    is being placed before the audience is not a single, discrete image or
                                                                    idea but a dense and simultaneous proliferation of both images and ideas.
                                                                    Finally, in such a scheme, invention can no longer be said to rest with the
                                                                    rhetor alone but spreads to the audience members engaged in deliberative
                                                                    phantasia. The capacity of phantasia therefore maximizes the efficiency of
                                                                    words.


                                                                          RHETORICAL VISION IN DEMOSTHENES’ “EPITAPHIOS”

                                                                    Before concluding, I wish to examine Demosthenes’ “Epitaphios” (Funeral
                                                                    Oration) as a brief illustration of rhetorical vision in action. Doing so adds a
                                                                    new dimension to prevailing arguments about funeral orations in general, of
                                                                    which the “Epitaphios” attributed to Demosthenes is one of the few complete
                                                                    extant examples.26 I have chosen this speech in particular because it contains
                                                                    explicit references to the kinds of capacities discussed in this article, even as
                                                                    it performatively taps them.
                                                                         Consider the rhetorical challenges faced by the state-appointed orator
                                                                    when in 338 BCE he delivered the oration to honor the men who had died
                                                                    in a fierce and unsuccessful battle at Chaironeia that summer. The setting
                                                                    was a lofty stage erected at the public cemetery. By the time Demosthenes
                                                                    ascended that stage, much had happened with the bones of the dead. If cus-
                                                                    tom as outlined by Thucydides (2.34.1–8) was followed, three days prior, the
                                                                    bones were laid out beneath a tent so that everyone might bring offerings
                                                                    to their own dead. The remains were then placed in cypress chests—one
                                                                    156                                 D. Hawhee

                                                                    for each tribe of Athens—and carried in a mass procession by means of
                                                                    hearses along with a single empty bed with a shroud for those whose
                                                                    remains were not recovered. The procession of the bones was open to
                                                                    everyone, and at this time women of the city performed their laments as the
                                                                    funeral proceeded to the public cemetery in a beautiful city suburb, where
                                                                    the remains are buried. Then, after three days of ceremonies and lamenta-
                                                                    tions, Demosthenes, appointed by the state, ascended the stage above the
                                                                    burial site to deliver the culminating event of the elaborate funeral: a funeral
                                                                    oration, an epitaphios.
                                                                          As commentators on Demosthenes’ “Epitaphios” observe, “It was not
                                                                    an enviable task to be asked to praise the fallen after such a disastrous
                                                                    defeat” (1949, 4–5). More generally, the challenge of the funeral oration was
                                                                    to shift the focus from the entombed, lifeless bodies that had been materi-
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                    ally present for the duration of the ceremonies: first laid out, then placed in
                                                                    cypress chests, then laid into earth. The orator must bring the focus back
                                                                    to activity, past and future, by conveying honor on the activities of the men
                                                                    before and during battle, then sending the people back to their homes with
                                                                    thoughts of more than just corpses. Nicole Loraux’s classic study of funeral
                                                                    orations situates the challenge as requiring “the effacement of all sensory
                                                                    vision, correlative to that of the materiality of bodies, always already trans-
                                                                    muted into ashes,” which resulted in a process of abstraction, what she calls
                                                                    “an imaginary without image” (2006, 13, 343). Katharine Derderian, whose
                                                                    study of Greek mourning practices does not differ markedly from Loraux’s,
                                                                    nevertheless characterizes the epitaphios in this way: “Situated within the
                                                                    context of burial, the epitaphios takes its generic identity from its situation
                                                                    as a speech carried out at the gravesite (epitaphios) while it often attempts
                                                                    to override the significance of the inscribed monument” (2001, 166). Loraux,
                                                                    too, wrote about Pericles’ funeral oration, the first of these state-sanctioned
                                                                    speeches famously documented by Thucydides, noting that “it reverses the
                                                                    order of values by substituting for the soldiers’ real grave . . . a purely sym-
                                                                    bolic monument (taphos)” (2006, 121). Both Loraux and Derderian position
                                                                    the epitaphios in agonistic relation with material, written, and other oral
                                                                    mourning practices (Derderian 2001, 166–168; Loraux 2006, 271–273). Even
                                                                    so, neither Loraux nor Derderian considers exactly how the epitaphios is
                                                                    able to compete with the material, visual practices of mourning, the view-
                                                                    ing of and making offerings to the bones, the tribal caskets that smelled
                                                                    of fresh cypress. Or more accurately, both settle for a reading that turns
                                                                    on the ability of words and symbolic acts to effectively “trump” the mate-
                                                                    rial and visible corpses and grave, one that diminishes the “reality” of the
                                                                    present, replacing it with the abstraction of speech (Loraux 2006, 121). And
                                                                    yet the speech deserves further consideration in the context of rhetorical
                                                                    vision. Demosthenes’ epitaphios exploits words’ ability to tap the visual
                                                                    capacity of phantasia, thereby effecting a shift in focus from the corpses
                                                                    of the present to activities of the past and future. The lifeless, sacred bodies
                                                                                                       Aristotle’s Eyes                                157

                                                                    of the war dead are reanimated, their memory vivified, energeia projected
                                                                    into the future, all by means of rhetorical vision, all before the eyes of the
                                                                    audience.
                                                                         Demosthenes makes his challenge clear when he sets his speech’s pri-
                                                                    mary task as “making visible (dêloun) the deeds of these men” (1949, 13).
                                                                    Later, Demosthenes’ speech references directly—and just once—the “dear
                                                                    bodies” of the warriors, lamenting how the removal of the warriors’ souls
                                                                    from their bodies resulted in the removal of the very “self-esteem of Greece.”
                                                                    He continues:

                                                                         For just as, if the light of day were removed out of this universe of ours,
                                                                         all the remnant of life would be hard to grasp and fierce (duscherēs kai
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                         chalepos), so, now that these men have been taken from us, all the old-
                                                                         time radiance of the Greeks is sunk in gloom and profound obscurity.
                                                                         (1949, 24)

                                                                    This passage is noteworthy for its sheer number of references to light and
                                                                    life and life as light. The central analogy of the passage goes something like
                                                                    this: the removal of life from the warriors’ bodies results in the removal of
                                                                    light from the city-state. Radiance thus becomes gloom; presence, absence.
                                                                    In Demosthenes’ self-admitted “exaggerated” metonymy, even perception
                                                                    itself vanishes, leaving Athenians, and especially mourners attending the
                                                                    speech, groping in the dark. If considered next to Aristotle’s etymology of
                                                                    phantasia as derived from light (phaos), Demosthenes’ description of Athens
                                                                    as dark and lifeless might be read as a preparation for phantasia, much as
                                                                    when a stage darkens before a new act.
                                                                          How to mitigate such a painful extinguishing? How to help the bereft
                                                                    see again? Such was the double challenge faced by Demosthenes and, for
                                                                    that matter, all orators elected to perform the public duty of delivering the
                                                                    funeral oration, Pericles and Aspasia among them: to transform pain into
                                                                    pleasure, darkness into light. No small task, it would seem. Early in his
                                                                    funeral oration Demosthenes attests to a profound aporia. And yet it is
                                                                    not the kind of aporia one would expect in a funeral oration—a kind of
                                                                    soul-sucking grief, a loss in the face of loss. Instead it is an aporia caused,
                                                                    curiously, by excess. Here is the relevant passage: “Though many deeds of
                                                                    these men are at hand because of which they will be justly eulogized, I am
                                                                    at a loss what to mention first when I come face to face with the facts. For
                                                                    thronging into my mind as they do, all at one and the same time, it becomes
                                                                    difficult to make a choice among them” (1949, 15). Here, Demosthenes both
                                                                    exploits and reverses the “weakness” of phantasia, narrating its ability to see
                                                                    multiple deeds simultaneously. The sheer density of the simultaneous visions
                                                                    is captured by the translator’s choice of the verb thronging. The Greek here
                                                                    is simply the word for coming into (prosistamena), yet the translation as
                                                                    thronging captures the force of the word panta (“all”) which follows the
                                                                    158                                 D. Hawhee

                                                                    verb. So “all coming into my mind at once” is rendered more efficiently and
                                                                    perhaps more elegantly as “thronging.” The images of the soldiers’ past activ-
                                                                    ities charge into sight, as if into battle. What is more, the subsequent phrase
                                                                    that is translated “at one and the same time”—eis hena kairon—might per-
                                                                    haps be better rendered “on this one occasion,” to get at the rhetorical effect
                                                                    of Demosthenes’ particularly cunning move. Demosthenes presents his own
                                                                    memory as overcome—infested would not be too strong a word—with the
                                                                    lively memories of the past. And it is the very cumulative density of active,
                                                                    kinetic, visual, and visible memories—memories of lively bodies, infused
                                                                    with energeia—that overtakes the motionless dead bodies before the eyes of
                                                                    the hearers. Recall the discussions of deliberative phantasia that confirm the
                                                                    phantasic mind’s ability to see multiple images at once, an ability corrobo-
                                                                    rated in the Metaphysics: “Numerous memories of the same thing eventually
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                    produce the effect of a single experience” (981a4). The cumulative effect of
                                                                    such memories can be powerful indeed.
                                                                          Demosthenes’ narration of his own inventional act—his own phantasia,
                                                                    because it remains at the level of the energeia of the images themselves,
                                                                    rather than any specific details—also allows room for listeners to fill in their
                                                                    own images of these men’s actions. Such narration partners then with the
                                                                    chronological narration that follows, in which Demosthenes notes the col-
                                                                    lective greatness that distinguished the dead through their lives, depicting
                                                                    them as “engaging in the exercises appropriate to each stage of life” (1949,
                                                                    16), up to and including answering the call to battle, even when the call
                                                                    resulted from circumstances that might have been averted: “These men did
                                                                    not bear a grudge but stepping forward and eagerly offering their all, bod-
                                                                    ies, money, and allies, they entered upon the ordeal of the contest, in which
                                                                    they were not sparing even of their lives” (18). The images presented in
                                                                    this passage, though not metaphorical, are nevertheless full of energeia;
                                                                    the men’s lives full of activity, always displaying what Demosthenes at one
                                                                    point calls “sound judgment joined with public spirit” (18). The prominent
                                                                    metaphor in the passage, however, has to do with memory itself and occurs
                                                                    between the discussion of the men’s actions in school and their arrival
                                                                    in manhood: “Therefore, just as if recognizing footprints, the memory of
                                                                    those who were near and dear to them now turns to these men every
                                                                    hour in fond recollection, finding many a reminder of occasions when they
                                                                    knew in their hearts that these lads were of surpassing worth” (16). This
                                                                    metaphor of footprints enables Demosthenes to present memory itself as
                                                                    the act of visually locating the imprints left by the activities of the dead.
                                                                    Furthermore, insofar as footprints convey the image of past movement, this
                                                                    metaphor qualifies as a bringing-before-the-eyes for its implied energeia,
                                                                    even as it once again allows room for listeners to tailor the memories, to
                                                                    visualize individual footprints, much in the way that they were, days earlier,
                                                                    able to make individual offerings to the bones of their own sons, broth-
                                                                    ers, and husbands. The footprint description also lends further energeia
                                                                                                     Aristotle’s Eyes                          159

                                                                    to the descriptions that follow at 17–18, in which the men are seen dis-
                                                                    playing “public spirit” and “stepping forward and eagerly offering their all”
                                                                    (18).
                                                                          Demosthenes’ oration thus provides a crowded density of visual images,
                                                                    enabling the orator to pull off the monumental task of enlivening the war
                                                                    dead, of replacing the corpses with visions of active, lively bodies perform-
                                                                    ing remarkable deeds. The “throng” in Demosthenes’ speech thus invades
                                                                    the occasion—the kairos—itself. And through an intricate production of
                                                                    rhetorical vision, Demosthenes secures a lucid collective memory, thereby
                                                                    preventing the mourners/listeners (and by extension the city) from being
                                                                    “sunk in gloom and profound obscurity” (24)—in other words, rendered at
                                                                    once invisible and without vision. Thus rhetoric taps into phantasia, and
                                                                    phantasia enables the words of Demosthenes to overtake the scene before
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                    them.


                                                                                                  CONCLUSION

                                                                    Demosthenes’ “Epitaphios” offers an instructive instance of how rhetorical
                                                                    vision might work in a speech, and while this speech serves as a repre-
                                                                    sentative anecdote, it need not unnecessarily restrict rhetorical vision to a
                                                                    rhetor’s explicit narration of images’ energy or of the importance of seeing
                                                                    life in imprints left behind. Instead, as Aristotle’s own examples in book III
                                                                    suggest, rhetorical vision resides in short bursts of language, in vivid turns
                                                                    of phrase, in lively and lifelike metaphors. And herein lies the theoretical
                                                                    upshot of such a robust theory of rhetorical vision: words facilitate vision.
                                                                    They have the capacity, in bringing energetic images before the eyes, to
                                                                    compete with, or perhaps even overtake, what is already before the eyes
                                                                    of the audience, to lift them out of the present by flooding their eyes with
                                                                    active images from the past or projected into the future. The net effect is an
                                                                    active, vivid engagement with the rhetor’s words, such that hearers begin to
                                                                    engage in deliberative phantasia, leading to belief formation and decision
                                                                    making.
                                                                          Lest this intervention seem to rest strictly on the level of history of
                                                                    rhetorical theory, it bears mentioning once again the convergence between
                                                                    Aristotle’s notion of phantasia and the debates about visual imagery in
                                                                    contemporary neuroscience. Recent studies have shown that visual men-
                                                                    tal imagery activates the areas of the brain known as the primary visual
                                                                    cortex, named so because they are the first parts of the brain to receive
                                                                    and begin to process information from the eyes (Kosslyn and Thompson
                                                                    2003, 723). Indeed, according to Harvard researchers Stephen M. Kosslyn
                                                                    and William L. Thompson, one set of theories holds that “the same neural
                                                                    structures used in language are also used in imagery” (2003, 725), and a
                                                                    separate study suggests that vivid descriptions activate the visual cortex in
                                                                    160                                              D. Hawhee

                                                                    the congenitally blind (Prasad, Thomas, and Aguirre 2008).27 This is not to
                                                                    say that Aristotle anticipated neuroscientific findings made possible through
                                                                    fMRI and EEG technology. Rather, Aristotle’s ruminations on phantasia, its
                                                                    complex entwinement with memory, with the pathē, with deliberation, and
                                                                    with direct or actual vision, is not simply an archaic relic but a provocative
                                                                    set of observations about how words, and the images they carry, find their
                                                                    way into the mind’s eye (or visual cortex), bringing before the eyes that
                                                                    which is not otherwise immediately visible.28 As suggested by the Oedipal
                                                                    epigraph, saying has the capacity to facilitate seeing, and this theory of
                                                                    rhetorical vision is a prominent and unifying feature of Aristote’s Rhetoric
                                                                    that has for too long gone unnoticed.
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                                                                    NOTES
                                                                           1. See also Auerbach (1968, 3) for a discussion of the visual in ancient Greek philosophy; see also
                                                                    Jay (1994, 24ff); John T. Kirby (1997) considers the “textualization of the visual” in the ancient world,
                                                                    which is nearly the obverse of what I propose to examine: the visual capacities of language.
                                                                           2. This translation is my own. For translations of passages from De Anima, I have relied on Hett
                                                                    unless otherwise noted, and for the Rhetoric, Kennedy, with slight amendments that “detranslate” words
                                                                    like phantasia and energeia, and with discussions of the particular Greek words where relevant.
                                                                           3. As it is well known, Aristotle’s Poetics offers Sophocles’ Oedipus the King as the epitome of
                                                                    tragic form.
                                                                           4. For others, see Fortenbaugh (2002) and Walker (2000a,b).
                                                                           5. For Kennedy’s discussions, see especially his headnote to chapter 11 of book III, 221–222,
                                                                    where he notes the “emphasis on the visual, which is characteristic of Aristotle” (2007, 222), as well as
                                                                    his treatment of what he calls “Aristotelian words with visual imagery” (2007, 170), and his meditation
                                                                    on possible connections to neurolinguistics (1996, 171–172). The two recent noteworthy examinations
                                                                    of Aristotle’s visual concepts are by Sarah Newman (2002) and Ned O’Gorman (2005). I make more
                                                                    extensive use of each of these articles later.
                                                                           6. Scholars who have weighed in with arguments about the unity of Aristotle’s Rhetoric include
                                                                    Gross and Dascal (2001); McAdon (2004); Poster (1997); Ross (1995, 285); and Barnes (1995, 263–264).
                                                                    These last two are also cited in Gross and Dascal (2001, 275).
                                                                           7. Similar theoretical work has been done with a focus on sound. See Porter (2004) and Graff
                                                                    (2001).
                                                                           8. For some of the best work in visual rhetoric, see Finnegan’s articles (2001, 2005, 2008) and her
                                                                    book, Picturing Poverty (2003); Robert Hariman and John Lucaites (2007), and James Kimble (2006).
                                                                           9. David Blakesley and Collin Brooke, in an introduction to a special issue on visual rhetoric in
                                                                    Enculturation, mention phantasia briefly in their meditation on the intersections between the rhetorical
                                                                    and the visual, as well as Gorgias’s recognition of “the power of the word to conjure images” (2001,
                                                                    node 2). See also Catherine L. Hobbs, who mentions phantasia in the context of visual rhetoric and
                                                                    ocularism, attributing its development primarily to the Epicureans (2004, 63–64). Joshua Gunn (2003)
                                                                    and James P. McDaniel (2000) both mention phantasia in their recuperation of psychoanalytic strands of
                                                                    imagination. Finnegan, Blakesley, Brooke, Hobbs, Gunn, and McDaniel aside, though, the scanty regard
                                                                    for Aristotle’s emphasis on the language and the visual is especially curious given the affinity that visual
                                                                    rhetoric scholars have for terms in Aristotle’s rhetorical toolbox, often adopting familiar concepts such as
                                                                    enthymeme, pathos, and topoi. See, for example, Valerie Smith’s (2007) discussion of the uses and misuses
                                                                    of enthymemes in visual rhetoric scholarship. Joshua Gunn (2005) discusses iconic topoi in the context
                                                                    of Satanism, and Finnegan’s work, especially “The Naturalistic Enthymeme” (2001) and “Recognizing
                                                                    Lincoln” (2005), turn on the notion of enthymeme. Hariman and Lucaites deploy enthymemes (2007,
                                                                    33, 165–166) and pathos (140–141, 166, 351n11, and 258n62). I want to acknowledge here the work
                                                                    that has been done on written words as graphic images (e.g., Kress and Van Leeuwen 2006, and in
                                                                    the ancient context, Graff 2001) and to note at the outset, even though it will become clear as I define
                                                                                                                 Aristotle’s Eyes                                          161

                                                                    terms that this kind of direct vision, while important and fascinating, is not my main focus. Of this work,
                                                                    my contribution potentially intersects with Craig Stroupe’s article “Visualizing English,” which crosses the
                                                                    “visual/verbal border” (2000, 609)—only I am crossing at a different place. The end of the article contains
                                                                    a brief discussion of neuroscientific findings along these lines of visual imagery.
                                                                            10. A theory of rhetorical vision is not of course confined solely to the pages of the Rhetoric;
                                                                    its residue can be found in other texts, Aristotelian and non-Aristotelian. Since I began working on
                                                                    this concept, I have noticed something like rhetorical vision, for example, in the writings of Quintilian,
                                                                    Augustine, GiambattistaVico, Joseph Priestley, Kenneth Burke, and others. It is Aristotle, however, who
                                                                    first offers an array of tools and terms for considering how words enable sight, and an elucidation
                                                                    of rhetorical vision in Aristotle may help shed light for work on subsequent theorists whose accounts
                                                                    mobilize or augment a notion of rhetorical vision: Quintilian (1960), Institutio Oratoria 4.2. For Vico, see
                                                                    especially Luft (1997). Joseph Priestley’s ([1777] 1965) commitments to Hartelian associationist psychology
                                                                    make for a lively and vivid account of how “things” make lively imagistic connections in the mind
                                                                    which yield thought. His discussion of amplification flickers on the edges of a notion of rhetorical
                                                                    vision (26–32; see also Hawhee and Holding 2010, 280–281). Mary Carruthers’s Book of Memory (2008)
                                                                    describes medieval memory systems and their dependency on what I am calling rhetorical vision. See
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                    especially chapter 2, 18–15. For Kenneth Burke ([1950] 1969), see especially the Rhetoric of Motives
                                                                    passage excerpted by Moran (1996) and discussed later in this article.
                                                                            11. Modrak (1986) writes: “Our notion [of imagination] seems to exclude the immediate awareness
                                                                    of objects in our environment and to include the manipulation of ideas.” Aristotle’s notion of phantasia,
                                                                    I shall argue, includes the former and excludes the latter. Kevin White (1985) notes this same difficulty
                                                                    and observes, “The physiological study of the ‘imagination’ seems to have its origins in Galen’s medical
                                                                    researches, which make use of Aristotle’s remarks on to phantastikon” (484n4); in other words, there is
                                                                    a link, but later uses of the term imagination do not by any means correspond to phantasia: “We must
                                                                    bear in mind the extreme inappropriateness of these post-Aristotelian connotations of the term” (White
                                                                    1985, 484).
                                                                            12. Martha Nussbaum (1985) and Victor Caston (1996) would probably disagree with my wish to
                                                                    stress “image” here; Nussbaum argues that images have been overstressed in contemporary interpretations
                                                                    of phantasia, and she opts instead to emphasize its ties to the verb phainesthai, “to appear”; Caston
                                                                    follows a similar logic by linking Aristotle’s phantasia to Plato (21n3). Most other scholars discussed in
                                                                    this essay, however, foreground images rather strenuously.
                                                                            13. For a book-length discussion of Aristotle’s theory of language and meaning-making replete
                                                                    with references to phantasia, see Modrak (2001).
                                                                            14. Victor Caston (1996, 21n3) includes speech in a long list of activities Aristotle explains with
                                                                    reference to phantasia.
                                                                            15. Here I am thinking of Kennedy’s use of scare quotes when discussing Aristotle’s metaphor and
                                                                    “bringing-before-the-eyes” in book III: “the hearer ‘sees’ something in a different way and takes pleasure
                                                                    in learning” (2007, 222).
                                                                            16. González (2006), whose treatment of phantasia in book III of the Rhetoric will be considered
                                                                    later in this article, is an important exception here.
                                                                            17. I.10; 1369b 11–15: “Through anger and desire [come] things that are vengeful. But revenge and
                                                                    punishment differ; for punishment is for the sake of the sufferer, revenge for the sake of the doer, that
                                                                    he may get a sense of fulfillment. What anger is will become clear in the discussion of emotions, and
                                                                    through longing is done whatever seems pleasurable.”
                                                                            18. I have written previously about the antagonistic relationship between saying and seeing in the
                                                                    ancient world (see Hawhee 2004); here, I wish to examine how the two work in tandem.
                                                                            19. Carruthers (2008) discusses Wolfson’s (1935) approach to deliberative phantasia in her well-
                                                                    known Book of Memory.
                                                                            20. My reading of huperochē as a rhetorical strategy complements O’Gorman’s reading of epideictic
                                                                    in terms of sight and scale (2005, 30) rather than restricting it to belief and value. Considering phantasia
                                                                    as the link between rhetoric and belief, hyperochē as a kind of piling up of images good or bad helps to
                                                                    make the link between magnitude and value.
                                                                            21. A 1997 article by W. V. Harris is likely the reason Kennedy amended his translation for the
                                                                    second edition. Harris asserts that “it is thoroughly implausible, as well as philologically indefensible,
                                                                    to attribute to [Aristotle] the opinion that anger is provoked only by slights that are conspicuous or
                                                                    notorious” (1997, 454). Even so, if “conspicuous” is read as a strong version of “apparent,” a case could
                                                                    162                                               D. Hawhee

                                                                    still be made for this translation, and it appears as well in Roberts’s translation and commentary by Cope
                                                                    and Sandys (Harris 1997, 452).
                                                                            22. It should be noted that Gross’s account is not new. David Konstan refers to the “classical view
                                                                    of pathe as arising primarily in and from social interactions” (2007, 39).
                                                                            23. Kennedy’s note (2007, 135n50) corroborates this: “This parenthesis really applies to those who
                                                                    cannot speak at all, infants and animals.”
                                                                            24. For a discussion of opsis in Aristotle, with particular focus on the Rhetoric and the Poetics, see
                                                                    Stanford (1936, 109–110).
                                                                            25. Sara Newman too, briefly characterizes bringing-before-the-eyes as happening immediately
                                                                    (2002, 13). While her useful analysis of bringing-before-the-eyes is designed to elaborate Aristotle’s
                                                                    notion of metaphor, I wish to present the concept as working more broadly in the service of rhetorical
                                                                    vision.
                                                                            26. While the authorship of the “Epitaphios” has been called into question because of its inaccura-
                                                                    cies and similarities to other authors, the fact that Demosthenes (1949) delivered the funeral oration for
                                                                    the dead at Chaeronea is taken as a given; see “On the Crown,” 285–288. On this point, see also Loraux
                                                                    (2006, 36) and Derderian (2001, 163).
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                            27. For a study of the importance of visual properties of written words, see Cohen et al. (2002).
                                                                    For a neuroscientific account of language, see Mildner (2008).
                                                                            28. The imprint of energeia can be seen in common syntactic and semantic constructions too,
                                                                    as finds Dan Slobin’s (2008) study of the prominent occurrence of “paths of vision” alongside paths of
                                                                    motion, as embedded in such expressions as “looking beyond, over, or towards.” He also observes that
                                                                    “linguists, starting at least with Gruber in 1967, have noted that verbs of perception appear in the same
                                                                    syntactic and semantic constructions as verbs of motion” (2008, 1).



                                                                                                                REFERENCES

                                                                    Aristotle. 1975b. “On Memory and Recollection.” Trans. W. S. Hett. In Aristotle VIII:
                                                                         On the Soul, Parvara Naturalia, on Breath, 288–317. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
                                                                         University Press.
                                                                    ———. 1987. The Poetics. Trans. Stephen Halliwell. Chapel Hill: University of North
                                                                         Carolina Press.
                                                                    ———. (1991) 2007. On Rhetoric: A Theory of Civic Discourse. Trans. George
                                                                         Kennedy. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press.
                                                                    Auerbach, Erich. 1968. Mimesis: Representation of Reality in Western Literature.
                                                                         Trans. Willard R. Trask. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
                                                                    Barnes, Jonathan. 1995. The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle. Cambridge, UK:
                                                                         Cambridge University Press.
                                                                    Blakesley, David, and Collin Brooke. 2001. “Introduction: Notes on Visual Rhetoric.”
                                                                         Enculturation 3(2), notes 1–4. Available at http://enculturation.gmu.edu/3_2/
                                                                         introduction.html.
                                                                    Burke, Kenneth. (1950)1969. A Rhetoric of Motives. 3rd ed. Berkeley: University of
                                                                         California Press.
                                                                    Carruthers, Mary. 2008. The Book of Memory: A Study of Memory in Medieval Culture.
                                                                         2nd ed. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
                                                                    Caston, Victor. 1996. “Why Aristotle Needs Imagination.” Phronesis 21(1): 20–55.
                                                                    Cohen, Laurent, Stéphane Lehéricy, Florence Chochon, Cathy Lemer, Sophie Rivaud,
                                                                         and Stanislas Dehaene. 2002. “Language-Specific Tuning of the Visual Cortex?
                                                                         Functional Properties of the Visual Word Form Area.” Brain 125(5): 1054–1069.
                                                                    Demosthenes. 1949. “Funeral Speech.” Trans. N. W. DeWitt and N. J. Dewitt. In
                                                                         Demosthenes VII, 3–37. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
                                                                                                         Aristotle’s Eyes                                163

                                                                    Derderian, Katharine. 2001. Leaving Words to Remember: Greek Mourning and the
                                                                         Advent of Literacy. Boston: Brill.
                                                                    Everson, Stephen. 1997. Aristotle on Perception. New York: Oxford University Press.
                                                                    Finnegan, Cara. 2001. The Naturalistic Enthymeme and Visual Argument:
                                                                         Photographic Representation in the “Skull Controversy.” Argumentation and
                                                                         Advocacy 37: 133–149.
                                                                    ———. 2003. Picturing Poverty: Print Culture and FSA Photographs. Washington,
                                                                         DC: Smithsonian Books.
                                                                    ———. 2005. Recognizing Lincoln: Image Vernaculars in Nineteenth-Century Visual
                                                                         Culture. Rhetoric & Public Affairs 8(1): 31–58.
                                                                    ———. 2008. “‘Liars May Photograph’: Image Vernaculars and Progressive Era Child
                                                                         Labor Rhetoric.” POROI: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Rhetorical Analysis and
                                                                         Invention 5(2): 94–139. Available at http://ir.uiowa.edu/poroi/vol5/iss2/3/.
                                                                    Fortenbaugh, William W. 2002. Aristotle on Emotion: A Contribution to Philosophical
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                         Psychology, Rhetoric, Poetics, Politics, and Ethics. 2nd ed. London: Duckworth.
                                                                    Frede, Dorothea. 1992. “The Cognitive Role of Phantasia in Aristotle.” In Essays on
                                                                         Aristotle’s De Anima, ed. Martha C. Nussbaum and Amélie Oksenberg Rorty,
                                                                         279–295. New York: Oxford University Press.
                                                                    González, José M. 2006. “The Meaning and Function of Phantasia in Aristotle’s
                                                                         Rhetoric III.1.” Transactions of the American Philological Association 136:
                                                                         99–131.
                                                                    Graff, Richard. 2001. “Reading and the ‘Written Style’ in Aristotle’s Rhetoric.” Rhetoric
                                                                         Society Quarterly 31: 19–44.
                                                                    Gross, Alan G., and Marcelo Dascal. 2001. “The Conceptual Unity of Aristotle’s
                                                                         Rhetoric.” Philosophy and Rhetoric 34: 275–291.
                                                                    Gross, Daniel. 2006. The Secret History of Emotion: From Aristotle to Modern Brain
                                                                         Science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
                                                                    Gunn, Joshua. 2003. “Refiguring Fantasy: Imagination and Its Decline in U.S.
                                                                         Rhetorical Studies.” Quarterly Journal of Speech 89(1): 41–59.
                                                                    ———. 2005. “Prime-Time Satanism: Rumor-Panic and the Work of Iconic Topoi.”
                                                                         Visual Communication 4(1): 93–120.
                                                                    Hariman, Robert, and John Louis Lucaites. 2007. No Caption Needed: Iconic
                                                                         Photographs, Public Culture, and Liberal Democracy. Chicago: University of
                                                                         Chicago Press.
                                                                    Harris, W. V. 1997. “Saving the φαινóμενα: A Note on Aristotle’s Definition of
                                                                         Anger.” Classical Quarterly 47(2): 452–454.
                                                                    Hawhee, Debra. 2004. Bodily Arts: Rhetoric and Athletics in Ancient Greece. Austin:
                                                                         University of Texas Press.
                                                                    Hawhee, Debra, and Cory Holding. 2010.“Case Studies in Material Rhetoric: Joseph
                                                                         Priestley and Gilbert Austin.” Rhetorica 28(3): 261–289.
                                                                    Hobbs, Catherine. 2004. “Learning from the Past: Verbal and Visual Literacy in Early
                                                                         Modern Rhetoric and Writing Pedagogy.” In Visual Rhetoric in a Digital World,
                                                                         ed. Carolyn Handa, 55–70. New York: MacMillan.
                                                                    Jay, Martin. 1994. Downcast Eyes: The Denigration of Vision in Twentieth-Century
                                                                         French Thought. Berkeley: University of California Press.
                                                                    Kennedy, George. 1996. “Reworking Aristotle’s Rhetoric.” In Theory, Text, Context:
                                                                         Issues in Greek Rhetoric and Oratory, ed. Christopher Lyle Johnstone, 169–184.
                                                                         Albany: State University of New York Press.
                                                                    164                                    D. Hawhee

                                                                    ———, trans. and comm. 2007. Aristotleon Rhetoric: A Theory of Civic Discourse.
                                                                         2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press.
                                                                    Kennerly, Michele. 2010. “Getting Carried Away: How Rhetorical Transport Gets
                                                                         Judgment Going.” Rhetoric Society Quarterly 40(3): 269–291.
                                                                    Kimble, James J. 2006. Mobilizing the Home Front: War Bonds and Domestic
                                                                         Propaganda. Presidential Rhetoric Series, 15. College Station: Texas A&M
                                                                         University Press.
                                                                    Kirby, John T. 1997. “Aristotle on Metaphor.” American Journal of Philology 118(4):
                                                                         517–554.
                                                                    Konstan, David. 2007. The Emotions of the Ancient Greeks. Toronto, Canada:
                                                                         University of Toronto Press.
                                                                    Kosslyn, Stephen M., and William L. Thompson. 2003. “When Is Early Visual
                                                                         Cortex Activated During Visual Mental Imagery?” Psychological Bulletin 129(5):
                                                                         723–746.
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                    Kress, Gunther, and Theo Van Leeuwen. 2006. Reading Images: The Grammar of
                                                                         Visual Design. 2nd ed. New York: Routledge.
                                                                    Liddell, Henry George, Robert Scott, and Sir Henry Stuart Jones. 1996. A Greek-
                                                                         English Lexicon. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
                                                                    Loraux, Nicole. 2006. The Invention of Athens: The Funeral Oration in the Classical
                                                                         City. Trans. Alan Sheridan. Brooklyn: Zone.
                                                                    Luft, Sandra Rudnick. 1997. “Embodying the Eye of Humanism: Giambattista Vico
                                                                         and the Eye of Ingenium.” In Sites of Vision: The Discursive Construction of Sight
                                                                         in the History of Philosophy, ed. David Michael Levin, 177–196. Cambridge, MA:
                                                                         MIT Press.
                                                                    McAdon, Brad. 2004. “Reconsidering the Intention or Purpose of Aristotle’s
                                                                         Rhetoric.” Rhetoric Review 23(1): 216–234.
                                                                    McDaniel, James P. 2000. “Fantasm: The Triumph of Form (An Essay on the
                                                                         Democratic Sublime).” Quarterly Journal of Speech 86(1): 48–66.
                                                                    Mildner, Vesna. 2008. The Cognitive Neuroscience of Human Communication. New
                                                                         York: Erlbaum.
                                                                    Modrak, Deborah K. W. 1986. “Phantasia Reconsidered.” Archiv für Geschicthe der
                                                                         Philosophie 68(1): 47–69.
                                                                    ———. 1987. Aristotle: The Power of Perception. Chicago: University of Chicago
                                                                         Press.
                                                                    ———. 2001. Aristotle’s Theory of Language and Meaning. Cambridge, UK:
                                                                         Cambridge University Press.
                                                                    Moran, Richard. 1996. “Artifice and Persuasion: The Work of Metaphor in the
                                                                         Rhetoric.” In Essays on Aristotle’s Rhetoric, ed. Amélie Oksenberg Rorty,
                                                                         385–398. Berkeley: University of California Press.
                                                                    Newman, Sara, 2002. “Aristotle’s Notion of ‘Bringing-Before-the-Eyes’: Its
                                                                         Contributions to Aristotelian and Contemporary Conceptualizations of
                                                                         Metaphor, Style, and Audience.” Rhetorica 20(1): 1–23.
                                                                    Nussbaum, Martha Craven. 1985. “The Role of Phantasia in Aristotle’s Explanation
                                                                         of Action.” In Aristotle’s De Motu Animalium, ed. Martha Craven Nussbaum,
                                                                         221–269. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
                                                                    O’Gorman, Ned. 2005. “Aristotle’s Phantasia in the Rhetoric: Lexis, Appearance, and
                                                                         the Epideictic Function of Discourse.” Philosophy and Rhetoric 38(1): 16–40.
                                                                                                        Aristotle’s Eyes                              165

                                                                    Porter, James. 2004. “Aristotle and the Origins of Euphonism.” In Mathesis e Mneme.
                                                                         Studi in memoria di Marcello Gigante, vol. 1, ed. Salvatore Cerasuolo, 131–148.
                                                                         Naples, Italy: Pubblicazioni del Dipartimento di Filologia Classica “Francesco
                                                                         Arnaldi” dell Universitàdegli Studi di Napoli Federico II.
                                                                    Poster, Carol. 1997. “Aristotle’s Rhetoric against Rhetoric: Unitarian Reading and
                                                                         Esoteric Hermeneutics.” American Journal of Philology 118: 219–249.
                                                                    Prasad, Sashank, Amy Thomas, and Geoffrey Aguirre. 2008. “Cross-Modal Language
                                                                         Processing in the Visual Cortex of the Congenitally Blind.” Proceedings of
                                                                         the North American Neuro-Ophthalmology Society, Orlando, FL, March 11.
                                                                         Available at http://content.lib.utah.edu/cdm4/item_viewer.php?CISOROOT=/
                                                                         ehsl-nam&CISOPTR=434.
                                                                    Priestley, Joseph. (1777) 1965. A Course of Lectures on Oratory and Criticism. Ed.
                                                                         Vincent M. Bevilacqua and Richard Murphy. Carbondale: Southern Illinois
                                                                         University Press.
Downloaded by [The UC Irvine Libraries] at 17:42 08 February 2016




                                                                    Quintilian. 1960. Institutio Oratoria. Trans. H. E. Butler. 4 vols. Cambridge, MA:
                                                                         Harvard University Press.
                                                                    Richter, Gisela Marie Augusta. 1915. Greek, Etruscan, and Roman Bronzes. New
                                                                         York: Gilliss.
                                                                    Ross, David. 1995. Aristotle. London: Routledge.
                                                                    Schofield, Malcolm. 1992. “Aristotle on the Imagination.” In Essays on Aristotle’s De
                                                                         Anima. Eds. Martha C. Nussbaum and Amélie Oksenberg Rorty, 249–277. New
                                                                         York: Oxford University Press.
                                                                    Slobin, Dan I. 2008. “Relations between Paths of Motion and Paths of Vision: A
                                                                         Crosslinguistic and Developmental Exploration.” In Routes to Language: Studies
                                                                         in Honor of Melissa Bowerman, ed. Virginia C. Mueller, 197–221. New York:
                                                                         Routledge.
                                                                    Smith, Valerie. 2007. “Aristotle’s Classical Enthymeme and the Visual Argumentation
                                                                         of the Twenty-First Century.” Argumentation and Advocacy 43: 114–123.
                                                                    Stanford, W. Bedell. 1936. “The Quality of ’ OI in Words.” Classical Review
                                                                         50(3): 109–112.
                                                                    Stroupe, Craig. 2000. “Visualizing English: Recognizing the Hybrid Literacy of Visual
                                                                         and Verbal Authorship on the Web.” College English 62(5): 607–632.
                                                                    Walker, Jeffrey, 2000a. “Pathos and Katharsis in ‘Aristotelian’ Rhetoric: Some
                                                                         Implications.” In Rereading Aristotle’s Rhetoric, ed. Alan G. Gross and Arthur E.
                                                                         Walzer, 74–92. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.
                                                                    ———. 2000b. Rhetoric and Poetics in Ancient Greece. New York: Oxford University
                                                                         Press.
                                                                    Watson, G. 1982.“ αντ ασ ία in Aristotle, De Anima 3.3.”Classical Quarterly 32(1):
                                                                         100–113.
                                                                    White, Kevin. 1985. “The Meaning of Phantasia in Aristotle’s De Anima, III, 3–8.”
                                                                         Dialogue 24: 483–505.
                                                                    Wolfson, Harry A. 1935. “The Internal Senses.” Harvard Theological Review 28:
                                                                         69–133.
