   It Is All There: From Reason to Reasoning-in-the-World
   Thomas Rickert


   Philosophy & Rhetoric, Volume 52, Number 1, 2019, pp. 93-101 (Article)



   Published by Penn State University Press




       For additional information about this article
       https://muse.jhu.edu/article/721924




[ Access provided at 31 Aug 2020 19:41 GMT from University of California @ Irvine ]
               “PR_52_1_10_Rickert_print” — 2019/3/27 — 6:26 — page 93 — #1




                          It Is All There: From Reason
                          to Reasoning-in-the-World

                          Thomas Rickert



abstract

The emergence of narratives concerning post-truth, alternative facts, fake news, and
the like underpins a felt sense of crisis about the possibility of debate, insofar as
argument depends on truth norms. This essay argues that the post-truth narrative
is regressive. It depends on Enlightenment-derived standards of truth that were
from the beginning impoverished. I argue that rather than appeal nostalgically to
the past, we should look to arguments interior to rhetorical history that point to
truth norms that include worldly experience, or thereness. Using examples from
Protagoras, Johann Georg Hamann, and Maurice Merleau-Ponty, I briefly expand
on different ways of conceiving how to marry worldly involvements to our concep-
tions of knowledge. The world, inclusive of radical technological change, doesn’t
just shape but takes part in who we are and what we know, say, and do. In this
sense, argument and debate are ambient phenomena.


keywords: post-truth, Protagoras, Johann Georg Hamann, ambient, Maurice
Merleau-Ponty

Argument and its performance as debate are ambient phenomena. It takes
a world to have an argument, and as the world changes, so will the ways
and means of argument. The current narratives circulating about post-truth,
truthiness, alternative facts, and the like, while illuminating somewhat dif-
ferent registers, gloss this point. Collectively, they seem to assert that truth’s
sway in public discourse has lessened, threatening the possibility of robust
civic discourse and politics. I am leery of such claims. They are in general
regressive, since they are nostalgic, working from a rear-view mirror mirage
Pdf_Folio:93




Philosophy and Rhetoric, Vol. 52, No. 1, 2019
Copyright © 2019 The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA
               “PR_52_1_10_Rickert_print” — 2019/3/27 — 6:26 — page 94 — #2



                                     thomas rickert


of stability and surety. Setting aside the panic such writers generate, and
considering some deeper implications already within our intellectual his-
tories, we can instead see ourselves on the verge of a real advance in our
understandings of truth, argument, and rhetoric. Such an advance calls us
to reintegrate reason into the lifeworld and, in so doing, find within the
rhetorical tradition what opens new paths forward. Of course, this path is
well under way across a variety of fields, such as philosophy, cognitive sci-
ence, neuroscientific studies of emotion, moral psychology, and more. In
various ways this work demonstrates that Enlightenment-derived narra-
tives of truth, rationality, and human being are insufficient. However, here
I want to address not this large body of work, but scenes resonant with it
that are internal to rhetoric’s own development. This, then, is a statement
on the possibility of debate not as peak but as plateau.


i was up above it, but now i’m down in it
One sign of the regression inherent in the post-truth narrative is the near
absence of discussions of rhetoric. This assessment stands on Nietzsche’s
famous remark that “every advance in epistemological and moral knowl-
edge has reinstated the Sophists” (Nietzsche 1968, 428). We can better
understand Nietzsche if we turn to an iconic face-off between a philosoph-
ical proponent of truth, Socrates, and a sophist, Protagoras, held to be a
proponent of relativism, and hence, we might say, of what we now call
“post-truth.” The first half of Plato’s Theaetetus showcases Socrates and (the
spirit of ) Protagoras engaged in the exploration of the thesis that knowl-
edge is perception. Socrates tethers this thesis to other doctrines circulating
at the time, such as the Heraclitian claim that all things flow and Protago-
ras’s own claim that people are the measure of what is and what is not. We
can understand these as early theories of radical immanence. It is held that
Socrates disproves Protagoras’s thesis by demonstrating the inescapability
of transcendent ideas—whether in mathematics and geometry (154c–d),
identity and logic (155a–b), the forms perception takes (for instance, seeing
remains seeing [185a]), or the concepts that gather what perception brings
(185c–187a). These operate above the immanent social fray, being patterns
established in the very being of things (177e).
     It is frequently held that Socrates wins this argument, but in fact Plato
layers in many complications to this read. For instance, Protagoras scolds
Socrates early on for playing to the cheap seats and arguing unphilosophi-
cally (162d–e), and he urges Socrates to be better—more philosophical and
Pdf_Folio:94




                                           94
               “PR_52_1_10_Rickert_print” — 2019/3/27 — 6:26 — page 95 — #3



                              from reason to reasoning-in-the-world


more virtuous (167d–e). This is more than irony. Plato shows us Protago-
ras’s power because he recognizes that Protagoras’s argument is not, finally,
simply dismissed with recourse to the transcendence that mathematics and
concepts grant over social and material flux. In other words, Protagoras’s
dictum that human beings are the measure, of the things that are and are
not, is less a classic straw principle of relativism and more a problem that
any recourse to transcendence must seriously address.
     We might characterize Protagoras as making a proto-
phenomenological claim that we must include thereness in any theory
of knowledge, and thus also in any robust understanding of how argu-
ment can proceed. By “thereness” I mean that the production, accep-
tance, verification, and circulation of knowledge are inseparable from
involvements —the vertiginous complex of relations that produce the
world and everything in it. Truth stakes vital claims on this complex, but
does not escape it, and therefore remains internal to knowledge. That is,
part of what knowledge is includes questions of how best to find, prove,
and empower truth. Of course, this is a position Socrates found objec-
tionable, but we cannot ignore how Plato shows us that intellectual work
grounded in perception and mutability retains power. Protagoras feeds
Socrates Socrates’s own beliefs in order to test Protagoras’s own thesis,
urging him onward to question philosophically and so properly teach those
who may aspire also to be philosophical (167d–168b). Protagoras performs
a sophistic art keyed to Heraclitian ontology and epistemology that in turn
inspires Socrates to keep on his philosophical path toward truth. Rather
than reach for a transcendent position, Protagoras reaches out to Socrates
—his involvements, his mission—and from there catalyzes, in a manner
that mirrors Socrates’s own claims to midwifery (150b–c), a more rigorous
discussion of what constitutes true knowledge.
     The key problem of truth and knowledge is not misperception per
se. Rather, it is that immanent sociality is a massively multiplayer game,
a daedal and evolving play of alliance and contest for advantage. Here
language itself becomes a fundamental problem because it enables deceit.
Anthropological studies have demonstrated that the ancient tethering of
vision to truth stems from this recognition. Truth and sight go together in
all Indo-European languages, and countless indigenous cultures from New
Guinea Islanders to Amazonian Achuars are troubled by the unreliability
of language. In response sight is most commonly used as the resource to
anchor knowledge in the world, and beyond the human fray (Bloch 2013).
Truth is what is seen firsthand because it appeals to an external world above
Pdf_Folio:95




                                               95
               “PR_52_1_10_Rickert_print” — 2019/3/27 — 6:26 — page 96 — #4



                                     thomas rickert


the play of the “Machiavellian social” (Bloch 2013, 47). Similarly, astrol-
ogy and divination appeal to nonhuman sources, albeit ineffectively and
naïvely (Bloch 2013). Socrates’s appeal to the patterns of being, seen in log-
ical relations and mathematics, is certainly far stronger. The point remains
that social argumentation and debate remain inseparable from attempts to
contest and confirm truth against the irrepressible possibility of deceit.


in the light
The appeal Socrates makes to immutable truth gains new strength in the
Enlightenment. The combination of belief in reason’s powers, working
alongside scientific method, spurred confidence in the ability to generate
certainty, and so also to expand the use of reasonable debate in the public
realm. It is no accident that the root metaphor of Enlightenment is sight-
based. It goes hand in hand with science’s development of the “modest wit-
ness,” who, through established procedures, steps aside to allow the facts
to shine through (Schapin and Schaffer 1985; Haraway 1997). The mod-
est witness is simultaneously innovative and ancient, since the witness is
a refinement of the ancient problem of looking to the external world as
transcendent resource purified of human motivation and the possibility of
deception. We can see Kant similarly: he appeals to transcendence in order
to posit secure knowledge grounded in reason purged of subjective biases
and faults. Rhetoric, of course, takes a big hit in the Enlightenment. It is
therefore characteristic that when Kant grants a partial acknowledgment of
rhetoric’s necessity and utility, it is a rhetoric distilled to its essence (1987,
198n63). Tellingly, it remains tainted with the possibility of deceit (Ercolini
2012, 42).
     The general movement of Kant and the Enlightenment to purify reason
of the irrational prejudices at work in the Machiavellian social had its crit-
ics, one of the most perceptive being Kant’s contemporary, Johann Georg
Hamann. If the Enlightenment refines Socrates’s appeal to transcendence,
Hamann rekindles a Protagorean position with his insistence that experi-
ence and perception are essential to human knowing. One might say that
Hamann’s critique, insofar as he labels it a metacritique, intensifies Enlight-
enment by scrutinizing reason itself, and reveals what the proponents of
pure reason had to take as self-evident or on faith (Betz 2012). Hamann
shows that the attempt to purify reason fails to render it “independent of
all tradition and custom and belief in them” or divorced from “experience
and its everyday induction,” which includes the power of religious faith
Pdf_Folio:96




                                           96
               “PR_52_1_10_Rickert_print” — 2019/3/27 — 6:26 — page 97 — #5



                              from reason to reasoning-in-the-world


as the light from which reason should get its bearings (Hamann 1996b).
But perhaps Hamann’s most developed critique comes from his remarks
on language. In a famous letter to Kant’s colleague Christian Jacob Kraus,
Hamann upbraids Kant for arguing for Enlightenment “more aestheti-
cally than dialectically,” meaning that his language is more powerful than
his reasoning (1996a). By targeting Kant’s dominant metaphors that blame
the general public for failing to shuck authority and achieve Enlighten-
ment, Hamann shows that Kant himself relies on authority, specifically
the Prussian king Frederick the Great, as well as common sources of social
power—taxation, deprivation, and a large, well-disciplined army (1996a).
What good is being able to argue “publically” where everywhere else one
can simply be forced to obey? It is not just the attempt to set up society
on purely rational grounds that fails, but the “first deception” (proton pseu-
dos) that reason can claim autonomy and authority for itself (1996a). Here
we might recall Gotthold Lessing’s caustic remark that in the end Freder-
ick’s “freedoms” simply allowed one “to make as many idiotic remarks about
religion as one wants,” with political or other dissent unwelcome (Schmidt
1996, 3–4).
      Hamann’s critiques of Kant and the Enlightenment’s pretentions bite
deep, and later thought, particularly postmodernism, will push harder on
these ideas. Yet Hamann’s insistence on the power of religious faith marks
him not only as sui generis but as worth reconsidering. The appeal to the
divine can be seen as Hamann’s realignment of the Machiavellian and
transcendental socials. What transcends is a resource for what must be
lived—bodily, socially, politically—and it gets what meaning it has from
this active and communicated life. Faith guides, but as what Aristotle might
characterize as a hexis, an active not passive habituation. As spirituality, so
all transcendent gestures.


it is all there
This integration of the transcendent and immanent social realms speaks
to our own age. The narrative about post-truth, and the related idea that
argument and its ritualistic performance as debate is in jeopardy, hinge
on beliefs that irrationalism, dogmatism, and disinformation have eroded
the possibility for reasonable decisioning. In other words, the post-truth
narrative stems from the onmipresent appeal to an order above the social
fray in order to counter fears concerning language’s deceptive capacity,
our embodied cognition’s inherent biases, and nonrational authority. These
Pdf_Folio:97




                                               97
               “PR_52_1_10_Rickert_print” — 2019/3/27 — 6:26 — page 98 — #6



                                     thomas rickert


fears in turn authorize regulative force, as Hamann acutely highlights.
In Saving Persuasion, Bryan Garsten illustrates how such an insight plays
out today, disenfranchising small community, religious, and other social
factions from real public decision making, which in turn motors funda-
mentalist and dogmatic forms of counter-power (2006, 184). The contem-
porary public landscape becomes one where elites of various stripes decide
for and sell their decisions to their ideological and political tribes. Such a
picture is reinforced by commonalities in the diagnoses for how we arrived
at our post-truth predicament. Typical is the 2018 report from RAND
Corporation, whose title telegraphs its argument: Truth Decay: An Initial
Exploration of the Diminishing Role of Facts and Analysis in American Pub-
lic Life. The authors single out four causes. First is human nature itself,
which includes our cognitive biases, predisposition to affective suasion, and
so on. Second are new technologies and information system changes, and
especially social media. Third, they upbraid our limited educational system,
such as cuts in the liberal arts, which leave people less prepared for the new
social landscape. Fourth, they point to larger social issues, such as global-
ization, social division and precarity, and corrosive tribal politics (Kavanagh
and Rich 2018). Certainly, aspects of this diagnosis resonate with analyses
such as those of Garsten and even Hamann, in that transformation in the
ecology of information, education, and authority in turn shifts the locus of
what is attended to, believed, and acted on. And indeed such transforma-
tions spotlight the power that regulative authority originally had.
     The deeper lesson such diagnoses teach is that the world takes part in
the flows and forms of argument. It is not just that argument permeates
the social fray, it is that argument takes shape within the evolving com-
plexes of human nature, infrastructure, and environment. Social media in
particular exemplify the enfoldings and unfoldings of new technologies and
communication, and how our contemporary lifeways are transformed as we
explore new exaptive patterns within these techno-social matrices. As the
RAND and other studies demonstrate, one consequence of such change in
the world is the potent incursion of what regulated public reason tried to
contour, channel, or exclude.
     The great phenomenologist Maurice Merleau-Ponty claims that “the
problem of the world, and to begin with, that of one’s own body, consists
in the fact that it is all there” (1962, 198). The problem with today’s crisis
concerning truth and debate stems from an inadequacy rendered inevitable
by its particular exclusion of thereness. Millennia ago, Protagoras and other
sophists first brought this insight to light—and to practice—by keeping
Pdf_Folio:98




                                            98
               “PR_52_1_10_Rickert_print” — 2019/3/27 — 6:26 — page 99 — #7



                              from reason to reasoning-in-the-world


perception’s complex vicissitudes interior to the issues of truth and sua-
sion. The contemporary problem of truth and argument, we might then
say, paraphrasing Merleau-Ponty, stems from the fact that they must derive
their grip from all that is there.
     An example can bring these points home. In his book Post-Truth,
philosopher Lee McIntyre quotes from a 2017 interview between CNN
reporter Alisyn Camerota and former Speaker of the House Newt Gin-
grich. The occasion was Trump’s then recent remarks that crime was on
the rise; Gingrich was defending Trump’s claims. Camerota points out to
Gingrich that the claim is flatly wrong, and cites FBI crime statistics to
prove that crime is down. Gingrich counters that these “facts” bump up
against another fact, which is that people feel more threatened, and there-
fore, “as a political candidate, I’ll go with how people feel and let you go
with the theoreticians” (2018, 4). McIntyre duly compares this exchange
to the dystopian propaganda of George Orwell’s novel 1984 (2018, 4). One
sees his point. From Enlightenment-derived standards of public debate,
Gingrich must appear as blatantly deceptive, a textbook case of Plato’s por-
trait of the cynical sophist from The Republic, flattering the great beast of
the public to achieve manipulative ends (493a–e). The rhetorically savvy,
however, might grant that Gingrich is right to address the public. Garsten,
whom I mentioned above, considered it a necessity for the liberal elite to
reach out across boundaries to address, and win persuasion from, those left
out of the guarded circulations of reasonable public debate (2006, 184–85).
But Garsten, in typical fashion, must stop short of the dangerous sophists
(2006, 200). From this perspective, Gingrich might be applauded for reach-
ing out but finely condemned for not bringing public perception into line
with the FBI’s crime statistics. Crime must be down, and policy must so
follow.
     The arguments of Protagoras and Hamann, and the insights of a phe-
nomenologist such as Merleau-Ponty, offer another entryway into this
banal scenario. Protagoras would remind us that Gingrich rightly notes that
the public feels unsafe; such perception is knowledge. Here we see a con-
nection to RAND’s Truth Decay report, which points out that phenomena
such as social media reshape how we are in the world. The intense media
circulation of violent and criminal images does generate a widespread sense
of insecurity. FBI statistics do not challenge this feeling; they render it nei-
ther false, nor unbelieved, nor unfelt.
     To return to my initial claim, argument and debate are ambient. It
takes a world—the “it is all there”—to have a debate. World describes the
Pdf_Folio:99




                                               99
                “PR_52_1_10_Rickert_print” — 2019/3/27 — 6:26 — page 100 — #8



                                      thomas rickert


involvements and contentions that are distributed, scaffolded, and circu-
lated through peoples, infrastructures, and environments. Every element in
this distributive complex, to greater and lesser degrees, impacts and con-
tours the disputatious flow. Social media and technologies are perhaps the
most spectacular element of change, but to extract such technological medi-
ation from other complex changes is to begin the process of winnowing
out the fact that it is all there. And while the older edifice may feel itself to
be in crisis, nostalgic return cannot work, as the world is different. Hence,
we must go forward. For me, this necessitates a post-Protagorean grap-
pling with knowledge inclusive of the world’s surfeit: the slipperiness and
fecundity of language, the inescapability of morality and emotion in human
cognition, the corporeal and Machiavellian nature of social being, the trans-
formations ongoing in our world and its environments, and particularly
of technology and media. In short, world in its materialist and meaning-
ful instantiations doesn’t just shape but takes part in who we are and what
we know, say, and do. An attenuated form of truth in debate was never
as secure as it was claimed and always relied on authority. Of course, the
vicissitudes of deceit do not go away, nor should we shy away from con-
demning them, even if our understanding of deceit may evolve. Nonethe-
less, truth, as a concept and moral precept, will always be a vital player—
it is and will always remain an emergent norm in human dwelling. But a
theory of truth that cannot finally account for the banality of an everyday
rhetorical exchange such as the Gingrich example without gasping in hor-
ror is worth little more than the gasp—which is to say, not much.

                                                              Department of English
                                                                 Purdue University



works cited
Betz, John R. 2012. After Enlightenment: The Post-secular Vision of J. G. Hamann. Malden,
          MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Bloch, Maurice. 2013. In and Out of Each Other’s Bodies: Theory of Mind, Evolution, Truth,
          and the Nature of the Social. Boulder, CO: Paradigm.
Ercolini, G. L. 2012. Kant’s Philosophy of Communication. Pittsburgh, PA: Duquesne Uni-
          versity Press.
Garsten, Bryan. 2006. Saving Persuasion. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.


Pdf_Folio:100




                                             100
                “PR_52_1_10_Rickert_print” — 2019/3/27 — 6:26 — page 101 — #9



                               from reason to reasoning-in-the-world


Hamann, Johann Georg. 1996a. “Letter to Christian Jacob Kraus (18 December 1784).”
           Trans. Garrett Green. In What Is Enlightenment?, ed. James Schmidt, 145–53.
           Berkeley: University of California Press.
———. 1996b. “Metacritique on the Purism of Reason.” Trans. Kenneth Haynes. In What
           Is Enlightenment?, ed. James Schmidt, 154–67. Berkeley: University of California
           Press.
Haraway, Donna. 1997. Modest_Witness@Second_Millennium.FemaleMan_Meets_OncoMouse.
           New York: Routledge.
Kant, Immanuel. 1987. Critique of Judgment. Trans. Werner S. Pluhar. Indianapolis:
           Hackett.
Kavanagh, Jennifer, and Michael D. Rich. 2018. Truth Decay: An Initial Exploration of the
           Diminishing Role of Facts and Analysis in American Public Life. Santa Monica,
           CA: RAND.
McIntyre, Lee. 2018. Post-truth. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. 1962. Phenomenology of Perception. Trans. Colin Smith.
           New York: Routledge.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. 1968. The Will to Power. Trans. Walter Kaufman and R. J. Holling-
           dale. New York: Vintage.
Plato. 1921. Theaetetus. Trans. H. N. Fowler. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———. 1935. Republic. Trans. Paul Shorey. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Schapin, Steven, and Simon Schaffer. 1985. Leviathan and the Air Pump. Princeton, NJ:
           Princeton University Press.
Schmidt, James. 1996. “Introduction.” In What Is Enlightenment?, ed. Schmidt, 1–44.
           Berkeley: University of California Press.




Pdf_Folio:101




                                                101
