                                CHAPTER 3



Towards Ecosophy in a Participating World:
 Rhetoric and Cosmology in Heidegger’s
  Fourfold and Empedocles’ Four Roots

                             Thomas Rickert




The issue of climate change charges the contemporary public sphere,
political debate, and international relations. While it is obviously a matter
of science and policy, it is equally a matter of rhetoric. Persuasion gal-
vanizes the true and actionable. One thing striking about the American
climate change debate is the staunch conservative denial of climate sci-
ence’s conclusions that humans are causing substantial climate change
that can and will generate various forms of poverty, devastation, and
suffering. What, it is asked, would be persuasive to those who deny the
human role in climate change? These questions are bundled with further
considerations, since acknowledging climate change’s challenges does
not necessarily show the path forward. I will argue that while the West
blames itself for its ecological destructions, there remain resources within
it that we should cultivate and pursue. I look in particular to two figures,
one ancient, the Greek proto-philosopher Empedocles, and one modern,


T. Rickert (*)
Department of English, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA
e-mail: trickert@purdue.edu

© The Author(s) 2018                                                      59
B. McGreavy et al. (eds.), Tracing Rhetoric and Material Life,
Palgrave Studies in Media and Environmental Communication,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-65711-0_3
60   T. Rickert


the German thinker Martin Heidegger. Both of them are remarkably
ecological in their thinking. They are as concerned with where we are
as who we are. Their ontologies are marked by complex structures of
entwinement, which take form not as singularities, binaries, or even trini-
ties, but quadrates. They treat not just with descriptions of reality but
with the simultaneously material and meaningful components of exist-
ence, including deep ecological enmeshments, transhuman values, and
the divine. In this sense they are cosmological. I illuminate their concep-
tual and rhetorical resources with an eye towards what they can offer us
today.
    This is pressing because it is precisely on cosmological issues that so
much climate science runs afoul. When conservative Christians, for
instance, deny that humans have the power to transform the climate,
we see that their persuasive ground lays nowhere near the scientific
fieldhouse. In fact, it often appears reactionary against science’s mate-
rialist, reductionist ontology. Such argumentative grounds are cosmo-
logical, since they revolve around questions concerning the divine, the
world, and the human role within it. Rhetorics of climate change, what
we might call forms of ecosophy, or ecological wisdom, need to grasp and
enact fresh resources that also have more vital cosmological traction. I
will conclude not with the usual exhortations to go green, revamp daily
life, and curb technology, but rather with a Peter Sloterdijk-inspired
consideration of the ontology of spacecraft. Contra environmentalist
wariness concerning technology and progress, spacecraft, I will argue,
implicitly generate ecosophy, and thereby supply different—we might say
otherworldy—rhetorical appeals since they stem from within a technical
legacy, in keeping with an affirmation at the heart of Empedocles’ and
Heidegger’s thought.

                       Cosmological Schisms
On January 21, 2015 Washington’s Republican controlled Senate,
embroiled in debates about whether to approve the Keystone XL pipe-
line, voted 98 to 1 that climate change is real. But then, when a sec-
ond bill was put forward to highlight the human role in climate change,
the Senate voted 50 to 49 (largely on party lines) that it is not caused
by humans.1 In the face of overwhelming scientific evidence to the con-
trary, it was argued that humans are not powerful enough to change
the climate.2 As Senator Jim Inhofe (Rep., OK) stated, “Climate
                     3   TOWARDS ECOSOPHY IN A PARTICIPATING WORLD …    61

is changing and climate has always changed and always will…The hoax
is that there are some people who are so arrogant to think they are so
powerful they can change climate. Man can’t change climate.”3 An oth-
erwise unmemorable vote is striking for the clarity it brings to the cli-
mate issue. While scientists, academics, and a majority of other nations
are largely in agreement that humans are significant contributors to
climate change, in the United States the issue is divided sharply across
the Democratic and Republican Parties.4 Certainly, the evidence is pow-
erful enough to have spurred the creation of a new name for our age,
the Anthropocene.5 Yet the scientific evidence remains unpersuasive for
well over half of Americans. There is a curious irony here. The notion
of the Anthropocene highlights the power of human beings in swerving
the world’s climate. However, the complex models that demonstrate
this human role are built from a sensibility that downplays the power
accorded the human in favor of systems logics, ecological entanglements,
and other posthuman stances. Meanwhile, a powerful conservative popu-
lation (many of them Christian) embraces the idea that humans cannot
arrogate such power for themselves, and thus have come to their own
version of a posthuman stance.
    These stances on climate change and human agency illuminate more
than the ironies of a term such as Anthropocene, demonstrating pow-
erfully the role of cosmology in public affairs. Cosmology comes from
the Greek; it puts kosmos (the universe and all that is in it in ordered
arrangement) into logos (order, meaning, discourse). It is implicated in
all forms of human dwelling.6 Climate change spurs cosmological con-
flict because how one envisions the world, the very cosmos, and the
human role within it all become the fundamental grounds for argu-
ment. Accordingly, conflicts re-flare between the cosmologies of science
and religion, particularly evangelical Christianity. Taking a long view, if
modernism can be loosely characterized as seeking rationalist grounds for
knowledge and values, supplanting moral and religious narratives with
technocratic ones operationalized through disciplinary practices, then
we see more evidence that this modernist conflict continues to evolve.
Historian Dipesh Chakrabarty points out that for much of recent intel-
lectual history up to the mid-twentieth century, environmental change
was acknowledged to happen, but so slowly that it need not be consid-
ered a historiographic matter.7 Nor was it a matter to be integrated into
political, urban, or economic planning. This view of the climate reso-
nates well with a religious perspective that places humanity well down
62   T. Rickert


the great chain of being. Hence, Inhofe: “Man can’t change climate.” As
a Christian evangelical, he means that only God can change the climate.8
    It is tempting to align the Senate vote with Chakrabarty’s argument
about the role of the environment in historical and philosophical writing
in the modern age. The environment was held to change too slowly to
be a player on the stage of human history. Those who deny the role of
the human in climate change seem to uphold this view, and in this sense
could be accused of being conservative. On this read, what is needed is—
ironically—enlightenment: the proper evidence that will finally convince
the deniers. This is why, argues environmentalist Thomas Princen, even
the most perspicacious of environmentalist thinkers and activists find
themselves repeating the scientific evidence in order to substantiate man-
tras about going green, conserving, being less greedy, going activist, or,
finally, appealing to resonant principles large numbers can rally around,
such as sufficiency.9 Once the facts are accepted, what remains is exhorta-
tion for changing social behavior.
    The Senate vote indicates that an enlightenment-based, reason-and-
facts approach has limited traction in the United States, as evidenced by
the surveys cited above.10 The facts approach ignores the deep appeal of
cosmology; for the climate change deniers, this entails belief in a world
of meaning and purpose that exceeds the human and centers on God.
Science reaches its limit when it runs aground on divine order. Thus,
the Senators represent a group perfectly willing to accept the consumer
goods science produces but quick to reject science’s atheological picture
of humanity in the universe. They accept neither the reductively mate-
rialist, evolutionarily-driven sense of human beings’ unimportant role
in the universe, nor the meaningless, purposeless cosmic order science
seems to offer. As philosopher Thomas Nagel argues, many stakehold-
ers, and not just evangelicals, are uncomfortable with this “blind watch-
maker” figuration of cosmology (the phrase comes from noted biologist
Richard Dawkins).11 Science’s “naturalist Weltanschauung,” in which
the cosmos is a meaningless void sprung from random physical and
chemical interaction, is anathema to many, and not only on religious
grounds.12 As Nagel notes, at the heart of these science versus religion
conflicts is the age-old mind/body problem, rendered not as a local issue
but a cosmological one.13 Mind, contra science’s materialist reduction-
ism, is implicit to the cosmic order.14 We will see this idea worked out in
Empedocles and Heidegger. The larger point is that the Senate vote is
                      3   TOWARDS ECOSOPHY IN A PARTICIPATING WORLD …      63

as much a response to disenchantment as that of numerous thinkers and
academics, including Nagel.
    The conservative Senators are committed to unseating the human
from its planetary throne, recognizing the divine in worldly affairs, and
granting meaning to life and work. Insofar as a scientific consensus on
global warming threatens an entire way of life (characterized by strong
beliefs in capitalist markets and hard work alongside a Biblically inspired
sense of divine order) one sees how science itself is open to strategic dis-
regard. It should be unsurprising that reactionary stances are watered
from rhetorically nourishing cosmological pools. Surveys demonstrate
the link between the strength of religious belief and climate change
denial, particularly for Protestants and Evangelicals in contrast with
Catholic, Jewish, or other denominations.15 Indeed, from the conserva-
tive religious perspective, scientists are often cast as atheists, furthering
the sense that this is a cosmological clash.16 The modernist techno-scien-
tific impulse, which has disenchanted the world and elevated the human
to mastery, has not, and perhaps cannot, foster the webs of meaning,
ritual, and practice that would affirmatively enliven an ecological attune-
ment. There is instead a constant mantra of doom and gloom combined
with exhortations to GO GREEN, as Princen has argued, strategies that
have demonstrated limited rhetorical power. Coming to grips with the
cosmological stakes means that ecological progress has to be more than
a matter of individual choice, or, perhaps even less effectual, an attempt
at conceptual clarification, as if precision in meaning will of itself deliver
socially relevant suasion.17
    How, then, can we revitalize values and bearings in a cosmological
key so as to better pursue ecologically balanced and sustainable ways of
life? One representative example comes from ecological scholar David
Abram, who argues for recovering ways of life built from “direct sen-
suous reality” and “regular contact with the tangible ground and sky,”
so as to provide “a set of powerful conceptual tools” for environmental-
ism.18 Abram also seeks to diagnose what is wrong with Western culture.
He argues that alphabetic writing gradually eroded the power of story to
uphold adherence to the “dictates of the land” and maintain engagement
with particular places.19 For Abram, the story of philosophy is the move-
ment from an ancient Greek sophoi such as Thales, who could still claim
that “all things are full of gods,” to Plato’s and Aristotle’s embracement
of the alphabetic, the abstract, and the metaphysical, on down to today,
where the modernist distance from the sensuous world runs wild and
64   T. Rickert


catastrophic.20 There is a direct line from alphabetization and increasing
abstraction to modern environmental exploitation and ruin. The excep-
tion, for Abram, is the advent of phenomenology, which puts us back in
touch with “direct experience” and hence provides a ground for meeting
environmentally friendly indigenous cosmologies.21
    Abram is a generative thinker, but we might pause before accepting
such critiques of the Western tradition. Consider, for instance, Pope
Francis’ 2015 Encyclical, Laudato Si’: On Care for Our Common Home,
which is one of the more striking recent statements on the relations
between religion, cosmology, and climate change. Pope Francis argues
that all things are related, that technologies and markets are not neu-
tral but agentive, and that the modernist mindset is precisely what has
led us to our predicament.22 He summons us to the broad cosmological
issuance that all beings share in Creation—they are not merely “poten-
tial resources to be exploited…they have values in themselves.”23 In so
sharing, there is a moral dimension to being itself that marks and obli-
gates the human to care for a “common home.”24 This moral dimension
is opened up by a sense of the holy graced by God, and through the
holy there is granted the possibility of the hale. The hale is a way of life
that stems from a sensibility to how humans are part of the rich, mysteri-
ous tapestry of creation, and thus that certain values inhere in the world
beyond human attribution. Finally, the Pope castigates human confi-
dence in itself and its technologies, since they prove “incapable of seeing
the mysterious network of relations between things.”25 Despite Abram’s
claim about the West, then, we see instead that Abram, the Pope, and
Inhofe all call us to uphold in various ways the cosmological dimension
in everyday life. However, they do so by elevating the religious dimen-
sion and blaming or downplaying science.
    Empedocles and Heidegger remain important sources for cosmo-
logically oriented thought because they sew ecological themes into the
broadest possible weave, one that includes both religious and scientific
groundings. While Heidegger can often be seen as a critic of technol-
ogy, his critique was part of an affirmative project that included techno-
science. The question becomes how to find a path more attuned to what
is hale alongside science and beyond science’s reductive Weltanschauung.
Such a project requires rhetorical work. Heidegger and Empedocles cre-
ate space for rhetorical work emergent with the lifeworld. They do so
by granting a respect for materiality and place that dissolves the primacy
accorded to the symbolic; acknowledging a sense of the ethical and the
                     3   TOWARDS ECOSOPHY IN A PARTICIPATING WORLD …      65

divine as being interior to life and rhetoric; and providing ecologically
sophisticated understandings of the world and our place in it. I should
also note that their fourness is not formal in the sense of providing a
framework or grid. Rather, these quadrates are emergent and genera-
tive. As I will conclude, they can provide generative resources inclusive
of technology for pursuing ecologically attuned ways of life, that is, for a
sense of the hale.


                              Empedocles
Empedocles was a Sicilian sage who lived circa 495–430 BCE. He was
a student of Parmenides, who resided in Elea, now Velia, on the west-
ern Italian coast—for this reason he is grouped with the Eleatics, which
also included Zeno, Melissus, and perhaps Xenophanes, all of whom
are predominately classified as pre-Socratic philosophers. Empedocles
was the teacher of the sophist Gorgias, and Aristotle famously claimed
that Empedocles discovered rhetoric.26 Empedocles speaks of persua-
sion, magic, healing, and mêtis, rhetorical themes all. He also performed
rhetorically intricate poetry with cosmological and ethical themes and a
strongly protreptic intent. His role in rhetorical studies has been limited
since he does not thematize rhetoric; and it is only recently, as we will
see, that his focus on the “four roots” has attracted environmental inter-
est.27 But he is also of interest for his moral teaching, sense of civic ser-
vice, and thoughts on the soul, all of which are bound up with his larger
cosmological themes.
   Empedocles’ cosmology begins with the four roots (rhizomata) that
he names as the sources for the entire universe: earth, aether (sometimes
rendered incorrectly as air), water, and fire.28 They are archai, governing
powers.29 The four elements intermix to create everything in the cosmos,
but they are in turn motivated by two other great forces, Love (philotes)
and Strife (neikos), about which more below. Empedocles makes a num-
ber of associative substitutes for this tetralogy, suggesting gods (Hera,
Zeus, Nestis, and Aidoneus), physical phenomena (sun, stars, rain, and
earth; but elsewhere sun, earth, heaven, and sea); and what the Greeks
considered the four basic colors (white, black, yellow, and red).30
Empedocles understands the four roots as partaking of both cosmos and
logos, the material and the mindful. He states, “For know that all things
have thought and a portion of understanding.”31 The roots, then, can-
not be reduced to a contemporary scientific understanding of cosmology
66   T. Rickert


that emphasizes materiality and material forces as primary, intelligence
and meaning as secondary. Empedocles’ roots work simultaneously as
symbols, personifications (or deifications), abstractions, and physical ref-
erents. They constitute the cosmos as being both ordering powers and
as being parts of the arrangement. As powers, they come to physical
presence in a variety of forms. For instance, Hera is affiliated with earth,
establishing continuities between animate and inanimate, mundane and
divine; aether stitches together sky, heaven, Zeus, and the soul.32
    The elements also generate: “From them all things that were, that are,
and that will be sprang.”33 This idea is implicit in the term rhizomata,
for roots are themselves generative, sources for growth intimate already
with all four elements. Roots dig into earth, drink water, send up shoots
to the aether, and gather the fire of the sun. Roots are part of plants
and, as Aristotle himself notes referring to a passage in Homer, plants
are associated with the word phusis, nature, which soon after becomes a
technical term for being.34 And as one reads Empedocles’ surviving frag-
ments, it is striking how palpable and sensuous everything is. The sun is
shining and hot; immortals are blazing, soaked in heat; rain lurks in eve-
rything, “dark and chilling”; the moon spins round like a chariot wheel;
and so on throughout the fragments.35
    This last point is worth underscoring. Part of what is remarkable
about Empedocles is not simply that he posited a rational basis for the
cosmos through underlying principles, but that this important step in
logical abstraction remained phenomenological. Certainly we are given
abstract principles, but these principles are always encountered. They are
physically presenced in boundless variations, including figurations hid-
den and obscure to us, such as the divine. This conception of the cos-
mos embraces embodiment and emplacement. This emphasis on worldly
encounter cultivates ecologically minded thought. This point returns
us to the arguments of Abram, mentioned above, who decries Western
abstraction and the ecological ruin it has brought with it. While he
espies an ecological sensibility still surviving for a time in ancient Greece,
in his view it fades once alphabetic-driven abstract thought takes hold.
Thus, he reads figures such as Empedocles and Heraclitus as stretching
between two orientations, one still indebted to the powers of sensuous
nature and the other committed to exploring the possibilities of the new,
literate reflection.36
    Abram’s point becomes particularly acute when we consider that
when Plato and Aristotle read Empedocles, they translate rhizomata,
                     3   TOWARDS ECOSOPHY IN A PARTICIPATING WORLD …      67

roots, into stoicheia, or elements. In certain respects, this is a fruitful
translation, since stoicheia also means letters. While Empedocles might
be cast in a more painterly light, with roots as colors making a cosmic
palette, Plato and Aristotle transliterate the roots into a writerly idiom,
turning what was vibrantly encountered into the elemental book of
life. In the Timaeus Plato likens the elements to letters, “the ABC of all
things” (stoichiea tou pantos).37 This can be a productive move, since
abstract generalization grips the world differently and spurs new styles of
thinking, particularly the theoretical mode. But ecological critics such as
Abram also note the costs, such as a distant, disinterested engagement,
and spatial abstraction.
    The dynamic quality of Empedocles’ cosmology also takes form
as Love and Strife, the two opposing forces that power and scatter the
four roots. In great sweeping movements, Love first brings everything
together, then Strife drives them apart.38 Empedocles says, “I shall speak
a double tale: at one time they grew to become one alone from many,
at another time it grew apart to be many from one.”39 When Love is
ascendant, everything is brought tightly together, not just harmonized
but bound—one image that comes to mind is the Universe as we under-
stand it right before the Big Bang. While we tend to want to see the
triumph of Love as a positive state, as Kingsley remarks, it is more akin
to “a cosmic blood bath.”40 It is the movement from persuasion, to
pressure, to coercion—no space, no separation, no difference. Our era,
says Empedocles, is one of ascendant Strife. Things want to be differ-
ent, to seek separation. This is better although not idyllic. Strife bespeaks
Empedocles’ refusal of mysticism or easy holism.
    We see this point extended further since Empedocles’ cosmology of
conflicting forces buffeting four roots is interlocked with his other teach-
ings. He maintains a rich sense of interconnection-in-tension throughout
his textual and rhetorical performance, and it also informs his ideas about
healing and ethics. Put differently, Empedocles’ cosmology is not sim-
ply in service to curiosity or knowledge but to the arts of living. Thus,
as Gencarella argues, achieving livable balances and harmonies within
the world and with other people goes hand in hand with an attunement
to the cosmic laws of Love and Strife as they scramble the four roots.
Within this cosmic storm the challenge will be to find some bearing,
some way to find a course through the always shifting elements. Since
there is no escape, one must seek balance, direction, freedom. Such way-
finding is practical and political, too, as seen in the recurring motif of
68   T. Rickert


Empedocles’ fights against tyranny and other forms of social injustice,
which are portrayed as social pollutions in need of purification. There is
a fittingness to be achieved in the complexities of interaction, one that is
pulled away from injustice, impiety, tyranny. Such fittingness, a sense of
the hale, extends to everyday life and beyond. Empedocles believed the
soul was immortal, teaching (as he learned, likely from the Pythagoreans)
that it could transmigrate from human to animals. Because of this
metempsychosis Empedocles condemned animal sacrifice and meat eat-
ing. In a striking passage, Empedocles laments how those who eat meat
are eating their relatives in newly incarnated form.41 Since all share in
being through the four elements, and the soul is the spark of the divine
found in all life, it is easy to see how cosmology and ethics mutually
condition each other. Interconnection calls for an ethical comportment
towards other beings beyond an exclusively human valuation. Ethics is
manifest both in the physical and the metaphysical: “what is lawful for all
extends continuously both through wide-ruling aether and through vast
sunlight.”42
    There is significant import for environmental thought here. As the
roots mix and morph across the material and the mental, the mundane
and the divine, the realm of fact and the realm of value commingle. This
move grants the environment value beyond human attribution. I will
come back to this point in the conclusion, but I raise it here: the tension
Empedocles assigns between Love and Strife is mirrored in the performa-
tive tension between Empedocles’ attempts to think the rationality of the
cosmos, without, for all that, equating the cosmos with human rational-
ity. Thus, we cannot align Empedocles with the modernist conception of
a fragmented, meaningless cosmos generated exclusively through mate-
rial interaction and biological evolution.43 Rather, as Empedocles tells us,
there is a “communion of all things,” which begets and kills.44 Meaning
inheres in the cosmos beyond human reach, but humans can share in this
meaning, because, as Simon Trépanier notes, “our ability to perceive and
to think is a result of our material constitution being the same as that
of the world.”45 This is no holistic panacea, however, as it is here that
the real challenge emerges. The soul, embodied and embedded in the
unceasing strife, finds itself confounded and unable to cope. Our plight
is one of helplessness, not from a lack of direction as much as an over-
abundance of stimulation and suasion.46 Put differently, being embedded
in a “communion with all things” is only a partial answer to the existen-
tial challenges of human dwelling and ecological sensibility.
                     3   TOWARDS ECOSOPHY IN A PARTICIPATING WORLD …           69

   The problem of finding existential bearings is central to Empedocles’
teaching. For instance, when he speaks to his student, Pausanias,
Empedocles tells him to cultivate his teachings like seeds that need tend-
ing. For if he does not, then he will

  reach out instead after other kinds of things—after the ten thousand
  worthless things that exist among humans blunting their cares—then you
  can be sure they will only too gladly leave you with the circling of time,
  longing to return to their own dear kind. For you need to know that eve-
  rything has intelligence and a share of awareness.47

There is much in this passage. It understands teaching as a kind of agri-
culture, in keeping with thematic of roots—but it further underscores
a very particular kind of rhetoric. Persuasion here is a matter of care,
of attending, and of attunement—to the fact that everything, being
ensouled or in some sense aware in its place in the cosmos, takes part
in everything else. Empedocles’ rhetorical wisdom is thus rooted equally
in words of power as in cosmic rationale. In a beguiling, confounding
world of strife, the need to forge hale and attuned forms of life and com-
munity become paramount. Lacking these, we are at the mercy of all the
worthless things that bedazzle, mislead, and fail us.48 For Empedocles,
rhetoric in the form he understands it is enmeshed within a complex
quadrate, one that conjoins the material and the meaningful. Persuasion
of every kind is knit into the cosmic churn. Nevertheless, the core of his
teaching is that within this storm paths open up to more just, ecumeni-
cal, and harmonious ways of life. In this way, rhetoric springs from and
responds to cosmology, worldly attunement, and ethical responsibil-
ity, bringing them all together, with and alongside a strife we can never
escape. Thus, Empedocles provides an early cosmology that situates
human being within an ecologically complex and meaningful world and
challenges it to achieve some measure of the hale.

                               Heidegger
Heidegger worked within the phenomenological tradition initiated by
Husserl, whose prime directive was “to the things themselves.” This
physicality establishes a connection between Empedocles and Heidegger
beyond the serendipity of their fouring; they both attend to staying
with things, to the sensuous world. They also share an awareness of the
70     T. Rickert


dynamic of presencing, the exploration of how things show forth as they
do. And they both seek to find equitable, attuned ways of life. Much
of this can be seen in Heidegger’s famous example of the Black Forest
farmhouse, where he shows the fourfold of earth, sky, mortals, and divin-
ities entwined in everyday life. Heidegger writes:

     The house was built some two hundred years ago by the dwelling of peas-
     ants. Here the self-sufficiency of the power to let earth and heaven, divini-
     ties and mortals enter in simple oneness into things, ordered the house.
     It placed the farm on the wind-sheltered mountain slope looking south,
     among the meadows close to the spring. It gave it the wide overhanging
     shingle roof whose proper slope bears up under the burden of snow, and
     which, reaching deep down, shields the chambers against the storms of the
     long winter nights. It did not forget the altar corner behind the commu-
     nity table; it made room in its chamber for the hollowed places of child-
     bed and the “tree of the dead”—for that is what they call a coffin there:
     the Totenbaum—and in this way it designed for the different generations
     under one roof the character of their journey through time. A craft which,
     itself sprung from dwelling, still uses its tools and frames as things, built
     the farmhouse.49

There is a distinctly ecological feel to this passage, although there are
some oddities. More powerfully than in Empedocles, ecology unseats the
traditional locus of agency, from human action to dwelling itself. It is
not the peasants who built the farmhouse, but dwelling. Dwelling means
the flourishing of life through attunement to the surrounding environ-
ment. The peasants are present, but so also the fourfold in all its physi-
cal manifestations: weather, soil, plants, animals, water, sun, tools, craft,
and a sense of value or even the holy. This is a sustainable and mutually
supporting ecology, one that Heidegger therefore characterizes as hale.
However, just as in Empedocles, strife in the forms of harshness, pain,
fear, and death are equally present and an inescapable part of dwelling.
   The four do not appear solely on account of the peasants. There is
no instrumental relation—the four are neither a telos, nor a means, nor
an explanatory grid. They are emergent. We can draw a parallel from
complexity theory with the notion of an attractor, in which a particular
state or form finds its habituated role over time within a larger, dynamic
system. That is, given evolving conditions, specific states or forms are
more likely. These new forms of stability or habituation are akin to flow-
ing into a “basin of attraction.”50 There is pull not push.51 Action forms
                      3   TOWARDS ECOSOPHY IN A PARTICIPATING WORLD …       71

patterns and “grooves.”52 The fourfold are pulled into their forms, then,
like a compass, pulled to polar north. The compass discloses but does
not create north; rather, north emerges from a variety of worldly factors
and forces, and, given the proper means, made present. The fourfold
are woven into the tapestry of life and value—what constitutes world.
World entails more than physicality: it includes growth, processes, pur-
suits, cares, and involvements. Accordingly, the fourfold are brought
forth in the everyday: through death, birth, rituals, seasons, weather,
plants and animals, farming, making, building, stories, and more. The
human remains an important site for disclosure, but the world also dis-
closes itself in its own ways—this too is part of the world’s “worlding.”
This is why the fourfold transcends human reason. “Causes and grounds
remain unsuitable for the world’s worlding,” Heidegger tells us, because
explanation, or human cognition in general, “just does not reach” far
enough.53
   As in Empedocles, Heidegger’s four intermix. Heidegger sees them
as mirroring each other, or being engaged in a dance that rings their
essential oneness. For instance, human beings are mortals, but as mor-
tals they are given in the rest of the fourfold, since they are of the earth,
under the sky, alive until death claims them, and cast before whatever
glimmer of the divine is hinted. This same process can be followed for
each of the fourfold, as each in turn opens into all the others. Sky as
seasons, rhythms, forces turns back into matter and earth; earth plunges
down to molten star stuff at the core, once again sky. Here we see that
Heidegger’s choice of poetic idiom as opposed to more precise terminol-
ogy (technical terms, first principles, etc.) is deliberate. Poetic idiom rein-
forces that the fourfold are never simply revealed givens. They can take
manifold forms.54 For instance, the earth/sky vector can come to pres-
ence as forms of ordering/scattering, depth/surface, pattern/random-
ness, light/dark, known/unknown, packed/dispersed, encompassing/
encompassed, perceptible/imperceptible, and—why not?—territorializ-
ing/deterritorializing. These patterns are not first principles but available
disclosures brought forth through the motivations and selections ongo-
ing in life. They are materialities, forces, processes, relations, and signifi-
cances brought to presence through our everyday lifeways.
   Because they are made manifest through being and living rather than
given as grounding principles, there is an interpretative or disclosive lee-
way to the fourfold. This complicates the appeal of unmediated immer-
sion in the environment, where transhuman values would speak directly
72   T. Rickert


to us. For instance, Abram invokes phenomenological thought to put us
back in direct touch with the elemental world. While Abram is correct
that we are placed in touch with the elemental world, it is still a leap to
then claim that in some fashion the world will “dictate” what we are to
value and do.55 While we are meshed into the world in varying degrees
of closeness, such proximity is never purely direct. The processes of dis-
closure cannot be circumvented.56 Manifestation takes disclosive work,
which generates space, or leeway, between manifestation and its com-
ing to presence in such and such a way. This leeway generates difference
and motivation. Thus, while Heidegger does not use the word “rheto-
ric,” it nevertheless remains implicit in his fourfold, no less than for
Empedocles. It emerges from a profound reflection on situationality—
that we are, as Heidegger will say, be-thinged, or conditioned.57 As with
Empedocles, the world and the things in it make claims on us, shape us,
call us, persuade us. They do not command. As Allen Scult perceptively
remarks, even in terms of being situated, we are called to make existential
choices about what to think, what to do, all of which betray what he calls
“a very subtle rhetoric.”58
    This aspect of Heidegger may be made even clearer in his rumina-
tions about what a thing is. Heidegger claims that things gather the
fourfold, and by so gathering, they “thing” the world. When he consid-
ers what the jug gives, Heidegger notes the jug’s giftly character, how it
niches itself into the world and human life. By tracing this niching, we
learn how the jug in turn reveals the world’s fourfold character.59 The
jug holds things such as fluids, which discloses how holding things is
already a worldly possibility—wells and lakes, for instance, are holding
vessels. As a holding vessel created in a world where holding is a possibil-
ity and a necessity, the jug helps stitch water, milk, wine into the tapes-
try of human life. Meanwhile, water, milk, and wine are in turn granted
by other things—rain, animals, plants. Yet rain, animals, and plants are
themselves possible because of countless other forms of being: the spring
in the rock; the earth as fertile for growing; the sun ripening the grapes;
and so on.60 These habituated forms and patterns take shape through
their complex interdependencies. From our recognition of these interde-
pendencies springs the first intimation of an ethic, posed as a question:
why should the world grant itself in such way as to make dwelling pos-
sible? This is where we locate the giftly character of the jug; in a way so
simple as to scarcely pass register, it bequeaths life, and in so bequeath-
ing, illumines some small part of the richer, largely unknown tapestry
                     3   TOWARDS ECOSOPHY IN A PARTICIPATING WORLD …      73

that is needed for our world to be. We are thereby inclined towards see-
ing our debts to these gifts of the earth, which we only partially under-
stand since they transcend our capacities. The jug thereby invokes
something beyond us that beckons us with hints. The jug’s giftly char-
acter is both material and meaningful—there are material dependencies
complexly interlocked into each other; and such material dependencies
in turn call for meaningful and existential responses, one of which is to
respond to this call as it calls. This is why things, for all their mundan-
ity, also open us to the world. In this gesture toward a sustaining world
beyond comprehension, things show how they are woven into the tapes-
try of the sacred—from such thanks, from such recognition of the gift of
being, stems further spiritual possibilities. And these, like all values, are
not solely of human making, although, insofar as humans are one of the
ways such values are disclosed and pursued, humans have their part.61
And it is through these possibilities as opened through the fourfold that
a sense of the hale becomes possible. The hale would be a way of life that
responds to, even attends to, the giftly character of the world. But as we
have seen in the Black Farmhouse example, this cannot be solely a matter
of human doing—or Heidegger’s for that matter.
    If the fourfold are emergent then Heidegger’s thoughts cannot be
the sole entryway into their workings. We can note that he had several
sources for the fourfold, including Empedocles but especially Hölderlin.
However, I think it is worth considering the irrepressibility of the four-
fold by seeing it emerge outside Heidegger’s orbit. Consider the post-
human arguments of the Deleuzian philosopher Rosi Braidotti. Citing
Lyotard, she points out that the ontological inhuman certainly springs
from the human, but, she argues, it is unconvincing to render this as the
sacred (or the divine); rather, she claims, we stretch out towards “end-
less cosmic energy.”62 Braidotti declines any religious affiliated lan-
guage here, for personal and/or philosophical reasons, but the deeper
connection to religion remains. There is an ontological point Braidotti
skirts: we too are granted our existence in such endless cosmic energy—
we are star stuff, as Carl Sagan has famously stated. Finding meaning
and communion in what transcends humanity is a sense of the divine,
since, as Heidegger has it, the godhead is withdrawn, not present—we
are beckoned by their messengers, signs, and hints.63 What divine glim-
mer is granted cannot and does not depend solely on human attribu-
tion. Braidotti, then, invokes what both transcends and permeates the
human and the world. This is indeed how sacredness essences, and in this
74   T. Rickert


manner Braidotti discloses in her own idiom what the fourfold traces.
Let us look to how she sketches a posthuman ethics across five features.
First, human beings are “eco-sophical,” marked by their interdependence
with the environment; second, the human is plugged into a “variety of
possible sources and forces”; third, the first two induce humans to “raise
questions of ethical and political urgency”; fourth, human temporality
needs to be “rethought beyond the metaphysics of mortality”; and fifth,
there must be “considerations of power,” especially as implicated in the
current techno-capitalist moment.64 Adding the fifth element of power
is certainly helpful, but does little to mask what is otherwise a perspica-
ciously delivered fourfold: earth, sky, mortals, and gods respectively.
    It is worth lingering on this moment. First, it is not a matter of
trumping Braidotti with Heidegger, since Heidegger neither invented
nor owns the fourfold. If Heidegger has any elevation here, it is the
poetic simplicity with which he rendered it. The poetic idiom is espe-
cially powerful because it does not just evade the pretention of philo-
sophical precision but calls it into question, and thereby leaves room for
the claims of other forms of knowledge, such as arts, poetry, religion,
all of which have their stake in the fourfold. As I have suggested, the
fourfold are attractors. In complex, evolving situations including humans
(and perhaps animals), the world habituates in such fourfold form. But,
second, it is illuminating that it can appear in a thinker who has little
use for Heidegger. This has the advantage of decentering Heidegger
as author/ity about the fourfold, which opens it for stances different
than Heidegger’s. Braidotti is far more generous about technology, for
instance, a point I have been emphasizing. Third, there is also the deeper
lesson, given in both Braidotti and Heidegger, of an attentiveness to the
vital and giving qualities of the cosmos that in turn spur new attune-
ments. They foster a living reception to these vital and giving qualities
and in this way open humans up to possibilities for more hale, ecologi-
cally attuned ways of being together.

            Conclusion: Ecosophy, with Spacecraft
The fourfolds of Empedocles and Heidegger sketch a cosmology in
which humans have a role but not an unconditioned one. They are a part
of a complex weave that transcends human understanding and control,
and that gestures towards a beyond to which we are called to respond.
Finding the best course for human lifeways, they find, cannot finally be
                     3   TOWARDS ECOSOPHY IN A PARTICIPATING WORLD …     75

solely a matter of human knowledge and will. Consider Empedocles
again: while metempsychosis is likely a difficult sell in the contemporary
world, its greater import lies in the cosmology it bears up. All the world
shares in meaning—there is a cosmic communion, even if buffeted by
the great conflicts of Love and Strife. Empedocles’ philosophy informs,
guides, and grounds a total way of life, inclusive of morality, healing, and
religious beliefs. Similarly, Heidegger’s fourfold captures how all human
doing is interwoven within the world, and made possible through it, not
only materially but meaningfully, and not only meaningfully but sacredly.
   From the standpoint of the contemporary drive for endless techni-
cal and economic growth, Empedocles and, in particular, Heidegger
can appear overly rustic or nostalgic. Critics point to examples such as
Heidegger’s complaints about electric lighting, liquor at the bar, and his
praise of artisan craftwork. Such criticisms miss Heidegger’s larger point
that interconnection written on a cosmological as opposed to human
scale has its precarity. Take, for instance, Heidegger’s complaint that
we should not “turn night into day.”65 This seems reactionary until we
consider that the rhythms of day and night define our situation as much
as anything else. They include our biorhythms, rituals, daily schedules.
Night and day also provide rich metaphoric resources. Artificial light
changes these rhythms, rituals, and schedules. It also requires industry
and infrastructure to build and sustain it, which entails still further con-
sequences. We are given wonders, perils, and temptations as we step out
into extended day and find new things to make and do with that time.
As with the jug, artificial light is tightly stitched into the world. While
artificial light is seemingly just one small thing, we see that it produces
multiple effects beyond its immediate locus; some of these consequences
we see but many we do not. Thus, Heidegger shows how our densely
interconnected fourfold background will shift as we make changes and
innovations. This corresponds to what, in the language of extended cog-
nition, we might call “structural couplings,” whereby “coupling with the
environment constrains and enables world-making.”66 But shifts thereby
change world-making. Such change often escapes notice, at least at first.
Climate change exemplifies this sort of big swerve; it was never actively
sought but emergent from advanced industrial life.67 We might say, then,
that Heidegger is one of the first thinkers of blowback.
   Blowback can stem from any intervention, but here I am using it to
mean unintended consequences resulting from changes to complex sys-
tems, such as the intricate webs of worldly, life-granting connection.
76   T. Rickert


Both Empedocles and Heidegger attune us to these intricate webs,
as a source of meaning and a necessary if mostly veiled background to
life. Further, there is growing momentum for cultivating awareness
about an interconnected, mutually implicating and sustaining world.
Environmentalist scholar Leslie Paul Thiele, similarly to Braidotti above,
advocates for an “ecosophic awareness” to convey this attuning to our
larger environment, hinged on sensitivities to powerful interdependen-
cies and unintended consequences.68 Promoting her own version of
ecosophy, Jane Bennett uses the example of a national power failure to
illustrate how myriad entities can be assembled to form complex objects,
such as an electrical grid, which in turn requires attentiveness to their
emergent, unexpected behaviors.69 More sweepingly, Jason Moore
argues that capitalism itself must be understood as grounded in a par-
ticipating world. It is not an economic system nor a social system, he
argues, but rather “a way of organizing nature.”70 This organization
has operated on a dualism between nature and culture, with the result
that capitalism has appropriated nature howsoever it pleases. However,
Moore points out that if one looks again, with something approximating
Thiele’s ecosophic perspective, then forms of blowback quickly become
apparent. The most obvious would be the generation of forms of neg-
ative capital, which sooner or later show up on the balance sheets.71
Negative value, he argues, destabilizes surplus value, and this enables
different paths forward, perhaps even stretching capitalism towards new
formations.72 Negative value and global warming are two forms of blow-
back to which we are becoming sensitized. They have at least demanded
a response, even if for some that response so far is denial. One of our
challenges, then, is to increase ecosophic awareness within the structures
and precepts of contemporary capitalism and science.
    Empedocles and Heidegger continually emphasized the need to
forge a positive way forward, to work not just with who people are but
with where they are. We cannot escape the infrastructures, industries,
and lifeways people currently have but must work within and through
them towards a more ecologically attuned dwelling. In this regard, sci-
ence, technology, and capitalism will need to become part of that path,
despite the fact that these are some of the most common targets for
environmentalist critique. On these points I take inspiration from Peter
Sloterdijk’s digression on spaceships in his massive philosophical tril-
ogy, Spheres. Sloterdijk argues that spaceships are more than technologi-
cal objects—they are equally ontological interventions. The suturing
                     3   TOWARDS ECOSOPHY IN A PARTICIPATING WORLD …      77

of a thing to ontology harkens back to Heidegger, and we can see how
Sloterdijk’s spaceship updates Heidegger’s jugs and bridges. But there
is also an inversion: jugs and bridges evoke an interconnected whole to
which we are all wedded and indebted; a spaceship, however, operates
in a realm of extreme inhospitality. Space is nonconductive for nearly all
life as we know it. Since no aspect of dwelling in space can be taken for
granted, a spaceship “constitutes a world model,” a kind of “immanence
machine.”73 The level of explicatory detail necessary for surviving in such
a harsh environment is vertiginous. To give one small example: astro-
nauts must sleep with fans next to them, less their exhalations, which do
not move in zero gravity, suffocate them in a bubble of nitrogen and
carbon dioxide.74 There is no resting on unexplicated assumptions, as is
possible back on Earth where the ecological background can simply be
assumed, as Moore exemplified through capitalism’s cavalier appropria-
tions of nature. Space lacks such “ontological comfort.”75
    The point, Sloterdijk argues, is that “space travel amounts to an
ontological alphabetization: what follows from it is that the elements of
being-in-the-world can, and must, be written.”76 Sloterdijk picks up the
thread we saw connecting Empedocles and Aristotle in the movement
from roots to elements, where increasing abstraction and alphabetiza-
tion formalize as science and episteme. Sloterdijk also counters Abram’s
argument that abstraction goes hand in hand with the West’s loss of inti-
macy with the environment. Rather, Sloterdijk taps a great affirmation
resonant with Empedocles and Heidegger. It is the affirmation of the
fourfold. The lesson is that abstraction and alphabetization also gather
the fourfold and disclose the worldly depths of rich interconnection.
Spaceships necessitate this insight. For life to maintain itself in space,
bubbles of lifeworld must be constructed. To construct a bubble of life-
world requires a profoundly rich explication of an ecological background
we take for granted on earth, where our lifeworld is simply given. For
spacecraft, these ABCs of lifeworlding must be spelled out and imple-
mented through the technics of disclosure and building. As Heidegger
has argued, to build is to dwell, and here we see how this manifests in
even the most focused technological enterprise.77
    The explicative disclosure necessary for space travel thus affirms some
of environmentalism’s biggest demons—abstraction, science, technol-
ogy, capitalist progress. But this disclosive work pushes through their
dangers and lights up their roles in the ecological lifeworld it is claimed
they despoil. Still, it may be argued that space travel is a fleeting pursuit
78   T. Rickert


far from average life or environmental intervention, and hence of dubi-
ous resource. Yet technology, as Heidegger continually asserts, discloses.
The pre-Socratic philosopher Heraclitus famously claimed that the cos-
mos was in tension like a back-turned bow, thereby pulling logos from
techne and granting it cosmic sweep.78 Sloterdijk makes a similar move in
showing that a technology not only does something but also illuminates
and explains the world. Such explanation is, he claims, modernism’s most
important undertaking because it demonstrates “what the coexistence
of someone with someone and something in a shared whole means.”79
Here we see that spacecraft, just as much as, say, Heidegger’s jug, makes
explicit the rich ecological stitchwork supporting life. The advance on
where Heidegger was able to bring his understanding of the fourfold is
that technology, as dwelling through building, also returns us to what
we euphemistically call “nature.” But the twist is that the background
we take for granted on earth is now more difficult to ignore; indeed, as
Sloterdijk suggests, contemporary politics, insofar as it lazily and confi-
dently relies on what it need not acknowledge or explain, is a form of
“hermeneutical dreamtime.”80 We can be harsher; it is a willful ignorance
gifted through the earth’s irrepressible bounty. But such bounty is not
infinite, and ignorance cannot forever ride high.
    This, finally, is the idea that we are left with: ecosophy cannot be
achieved only through exhortation, inducement, or training. These tra-
ditional understandings of rhetoric have their role to play, no doubt, but
if they are to have greater sway in forging more ecologically attuned life-
ways, they need to be grounded in cosmology. As a consequence, ecoso-
phy cannot be solely a human pursuit, but rather, in keeping with the
declination to elevate the human to master of the planet, the world must
be a co-participant; its materially dense and evolving interconnections
will have to be the counterthrow to the disclosive gesture we offer in
turn. We do not give value to the world; we dwell, participating in the
world, so that the world pulls us towards the way in which we will have
been with it over time. In this sense, ecosophy, rendered sophistically
across the lessons of the quadrate, is an attractor. Gratitude for a world
that bears up life remains a source for attuning to what signs of the hale
we are granted. The fourfolds of Empedocles and Heidegger teach us to
cultivate awareness for these signs. The world is replete with them. As
the water springs from the rock, giving life to human and vine, or as the
event of spacecraft slowly peels back the ignorance we assume in craft-
ing our earthly lifeworlds, we can find our own way to a new fittingness,
                       3   TOWARDS ECOSOPHY IN A PARTICIPATING WORLD …          79

one no longer conceived simply in terms of science versus religion,
ancient versus modern, or human versus world. That fittingness, in a
fourfold sense, will emerge not from contemplation, or some wrench-
ing attempt at transvaluation, but rather through what drives life now,
including technology, capitalist progress, and some sense of being part
of a larger whole. It is here, on these cosmological grounds, that rhetori-
cal resources gather, ones that have potential to sway even wayward con-
stituencies. The power of such rhetorical resources rises precisely to the
extent that they transcend the human and the plane of polemic, pulling
us toward a larger weave we can no longer afford to ignorantly dream
away, as if the world will always smile benignly.


                                    Notes
    1. Laura Barron-Lopez, “Senate Votes that Climate Change is Real,” The
        Hill, January 21, 2015, accessed November 27, 2016, http://thehill.
        com/.
    2. The NASA website provides a quick view of the extent of consensus, with
        links for further exploration. See “Scientific Consensus: Earth’s Climate
        is Warming,” NASA, accessed November 27, 2016, http://climate.nasa.
        gov/scientific-consensus/.
    3. Suzanne Goldenberg, “US Senate Refuses to Accept Humanity’s Role
        in Global Climate Change, Again,” The Guardian, January 22, 2015,
        accessed November 27, 2016, https://www.theguardian.com/.
    4. Richard Wike, “What the World Thinks about Climate Change in 7
        Charts,” Pew Research Center, April 18, 2016, accessed November 27,
        2016, http://www.pewresearch.org/.
    5. The term Anthropocene was first coined by Paul J. Crutzen in 2000.
        While a name can be proposed for an era, there is no guarantee that it
        will be accepted. The term Holocene, proposed by Sir Charles Lyell in
        1933, took several decades to win acceptance. See Dipesh Chakrabarty,
        “The Climate of History: Four Theses,” Critical Inquiry 25 (2009): 209.
        Usage of the term does not mean acceptance of it or its implicit claim.
        Those who oppose the idea that humans cause climate change thereby
        use the term, or its variations such as anthropogenic, negatively.
    6. Cosmos is related to the Greek verb kosmeo, to set in order or arrange. For
        more on kosmos, see Charles H. Kahn, Anaximander and the Origins of
        Greek Cosmology (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1994), 219–222.
    7. Chakrabarty, “The Climate of History,” 198–222, 204. See also
        Bruno Latour, We Have Never Been Modern, trans. Catherine Porter
        (Cambridge: Harvard, 1993).
80     T. Rickert


      8. See Elizabeth Bruenig, “Why Do Evangelicals Like Jim Inhofe Believe
          That Only God Can Cause Climate Change?” New Republic, January 15,
          2015, accessed November 28, 2016, https://newrepublic.com/. Note
          quotes from Inhofe and others on the evangelical position, which attrib-
          utes major changes such as the climate to God, and thus even notions of
          End Times, rather than human activity—or human intervention.
      9. Thomas Princen, The Logic of Sufficiency (Cambridge: MIT, 2005), vii–
          viii, 5–6.
     10. Wike, “7 Charts.”
     11. Thomas Nagel, Mind and Cosmos: Why the Materialist Neo-Darwinian
          Conception of Nature is Almost Certainly False (New York: Oxford,
          2012), 5, 10.
     12. Ibid., 4.
     13. Ibid., 3.
     14. Ibid., 16.
     15. Chris Mooney, “New Study Reaffirms the Link between Conservative
          Religious Faith and Climate Change Doubt,” The Washington Post, May
          29, 2015, accessed November 28, 2016, https://www.washingtonpost.
          com/.
     16. Scott Rodin, “As a Conservative, Evangelical Republican, Why Climate
          Change Can’t Be True (Even Though It Is),” The Steward’s Journey,
          accessed November 28, 2016, http://thestewardsjourney.com/. Rodin
          gives a first-person account of evangelical perspectives, describing how
          environmental issues are cast as liberal and associated with laziness, alarm-
          ism, and godlessness.
     17. See Thompson for an examination of how conceptual clarification pro-
          ceeds; cf. David Abram, The Spell of the Sensuous (New York: Vintage,
          1996).
     18. Abram, Spell of the Sensuous, x.
     19. Ibid., 185.
     20. Ibid., 108.
     21. Ibid., xi.
     22. Cf. Latour.
     23. Pope Francis, Laudato Si’: On Care for our Common Home (New York:
          Melville House, 2015), 22.
     24. Ibid., 13.
     25. Ibid., 14, 15.
     26. Diogenes Laertius, Lives of Eminent Philosophers, trans. R.D. Hicks
          (Cambridge: Harvard, 1925), 8.57.
     27. For Empedocles and rhetoric, see Richard Leo Enos, “Aristotle,
          Empedocles, and the Notion of Rhetoric,” In Search of Justice: The
          Indiana Tradition in Speech Communication, eds. R. Jensen and
                    3   TOWARDS ECOSOPHY IN A PARTICIPATING WORLD …           81

     J. Hammerjack (Amsterdam: Rodopi, 1987): 5–21; Stephen Olbrys
     Gencarella, “Purifying Rhetoric: Empedocles and the Myth of Rhetorical
     Theory,” Quarterly Journal of Speech 96.3 (2010): 231–256. For
     Empedocles and environmentalism, see David Macauley, Elemental
     Philosophy: Earth, Air, Fire, and Water as Environmental Ideas (Albany:
     State University of New York Press, 2010).
28. Empedocles B6: “The four roots of all things hear first: shining Zeus, life-
     giving Hera, Aidoneus, and Nestis, who by her tears moistens the mor-
     tal spring.” See Peter Kingsley, Ancient Philosophy, Mystery, and Magic:
     Empedocles and the Pythagorean Tradition (New York: Clarendon, 1995),
     13, 47. While the question of which God equals which root remains con-
     tested, Kingsley argues compellingly for Zeus as aether, Hera as earth,
     Aidoneus (an alternate name for the god of the underworld, Hades) as
     fire, and Nestis as water.
29. Macauley, Elemental Philosophy, 107.
30. Ibid.
31. Empedocles B110.
32. Peter Kingsley, “Empedocles for the New Millennium,” Ancient
     Philosophy 22 (2002): 282.
33. Empedocles B21.
34. Aristotle, Metaphysics, trans. Hugh Tredennick (Cambridge: Harvard
     University Press, 1933), 1014b–1015a.
35. Empedocles B21, B46.
36. Abram, Spell of the Sensuous, 108.
37. Plato, Timaeus 48B; Macauley, Elemental Philosophy, 107–108, 143.
38. Empedocles B17.16–20.
39. Empedocles B17.1–2.
40. Peter Kingsley, Reality (Point Reyes: Golden Sufi Center, 2003), 354.
41. Empedocles B136: “Will you not cease from ill-sounding bloodshed?
     Do you not see how you are devouring each other with heedless mind?”
     Eating animals, which contain souls, is tantamount, therefore, to eating
     each other. See also B137.
42. Empedocles B135.
43. Nagel, Mind and Cosmos, 4; Ursula Goodenough and Terrence W.
     Deacon “The Sacred Emergence of Nature,” in The Oxford Handbook
     of Religion and Science, ed. Philip Clayton and Zachary Simpson (New
     York: Oxford, 2006), 853.
44. Empedocles B17.4.
45. Simon Trépanier, Empedocles: An Interpretation (New York: Routledge,
     2004), 160.
46. See Kingsley, “Empedocles,” 360. Kingsley provides a striking interpreta-
     tion of a key passage in Empedocles’ work, describing how narrow palms
82     T. Rickert


          (steinopoi palamai) have been poured over people’s limbs, and “many
          worthless things keep crashing in, blunting their cares.” The image of
          narrow palms metaphorically connotes how our senses are always open,
          and, without guidance, overwhelmed in the overflow.
     47. Kingsley, Reality, 520.
     48. Empedocles’ sensitivity to communicative oversaturation suggests that he
          is the first thinker of the pitfalls of social media.
     49. Martin Heidegger, Poetry, Language, Thought (New York: Harper & Row,
          1971), 160.
     50. Alicia Juarrero, Dynamics in Action: Intentional Behavior as a Complex
          System, (Cambridge: MIT, 1999), 153.
     51. Ibid., 152. Juarrero succinctly defines attractors as “trajectories that con-
          verge on typical patterns” in the sense of being pulled.
     52. Jane Bennett, “The Agency of Assemblages and the North American
          Blackout,” Public Culture 17, no. 3 (2005): 457.
     53. Heidegger, Poetry Language, Thought, 180.
     54. Deacon, 157: “there are many possible ways that micro-details of struc-
          ture and interaction can converge to produce the same higher-order
          properties.”
     55. Abram, Spell of the Sensuous, 185.
     56. For a more thorough examination of the problems inherent to an unme-
          diated environmentalism, see Iain Thomson, “Ontology and Ethics at the
          Intersection of Phenomenology and Environmental Philosophy,” Inquiry
          47, no. 4 (2004): 380–412.
     57. Heidegger, Poetry, Language, Thought, 181.
     58. Allen Scult, Being Jewish/Reading Heidegger (New York: Fordham,
          2004), 58.
     59. Heidegger, Poetry, Language, Thought, 172.
     60. Ibid.
     61. Ibid., 181.
     62. Rosi Braidotti, The Posthuman (Malden: Polity Press, 2013), 185.
     63. Heidegger, Poetry, Language, Thought, 178.
     64. Braidotti, The Posthuman, 139–140.
     65. Heidegger, Poetry, Language, Thought, 150.
     66. John Protevi, “Beyond Autopoiesis,” in Emergence and Embodiment, eds.
          Bruce Clarke and Mark B.N. Hansen (Durham: Duke, 2009), 108.
     67. Chakrabarty, “The Climate of History,” 210.
     68. Leslie Paul Thiele, Indra’s Net and the Midas Touch (Cambridge, MIT
          2011), 2. Note that the emphasis on awareness underscores the point
          that while ecosophy is assumed to be based in philosophy, it is actually
          more attuned to sophism. It connotes not just wisdom but a receptive-
          ness to environmental suasion.
                    3   TOWARDS ECOSOPHY IN A PARTICIPATING WORLD …            83

69. Bennett, “The Agency of Assemblages,” 446.
70. Jason Moore, Capitalism in the Web of Life: Ecology and the Accumulation
     of Capital (New York: Verso, 2015), 2.
71. Ibid., 270–276. Moore provides many examples of negative value. For
     instance, industrialized agriculture depletes the ground, requiring invest-
     ment in fertilizer; produces superweeds, requiring greater chemical
     intervention; depletes water, requiring the importation of water from
     elsewhere; and so on. Fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and irrigation are
     finally unsustainable not only on their own demerits but on their growing
     expensiveness.
72. Ibid., 290.
73. Sloterdijk, Spheres III: Foams, trans. Wieland Hoban (South Pasadena:
     Semiotexte, 2016), 299.
74. Ibid., 304.
75. Ibid., 308.
76. Ibid., 309.
77. Heidegger, Poetry, Language, Thought, 146.
78. For a discussion of Heraclitus’ B51 fragment and the explanatory power
     of technology see David Rothenberg, Hand’s End: Technology and the
     Limits of Nature (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California
     Press, 1993), 2–3.
79. Sloterdijk, Spheres III, 310.
80. Ibid., 311.
