The Meaning of Phantasia in Aristotle’s
De Anima , III, 3-8


KEVIN WHITE           University of Ottawa




Introduction
Aristotle’s account of phantasia in De anima ,111, 3, occurs at a critical
juncture of his inquiry into the nature and properties of the soul. Having
just completed a long discussion of sensation (II, 5-III, 2), and wishing
now to turn to a consideration of the power of thought (nous), which he
regards both as distinct from and as analogous to sensation, he suggests
that an explanation of phantasia is necessary at this point, since there is
no thought without phantasia, just as there is no phantasia without
sensation.1 But while this sketch of a complex dependency among the
soul’s cognitive powers makes clear the importance of phantasia and
the need for some explanation of it, the intermediate place of phantasia
in the discussion and the incidental way in which it is introduced are
indications that Aristotle does not treat it for its own sake, but rather is
compelled to turn to a consideration of it by the exigencies of the
subject-matter at hand. The analysis of sensation, the characteristic
power of animals, could, it seems, be adequately carried out with little
reference to phantasia, even though Aristotle is elsewhere led to stress
the closeness, and even, in some respect, the identity of these two
powers;2the discussion of thought, on the other hand, and specifically of
 the human thought which is Aristotle’s concern in De anima, III, 4-8,
 apparently requires a special preliminary treatment of phantasia.
   It is perhaps significant that the chapter on phantasia introduces that
part of the De anima which is particularly concerned with man, that is,
 with the human soul and its characteristic activity of noein . The fact that
 1 427b 15- 16.
 2 De insomniis, 1, 459al5-22.

Dialogue XXIV (1985) , 483-505
484 Dialogue

the human soul emerges in the De anima from among those souls which
perform the activity of phantasia would seem to point to the special
importance of this activity in human life, and to the significance of
Aristotle’s analysis of it for his understanding of man in general. And,
despite his warning against an exclusive concern with man in the study
of the soul,3 it is clear that he shares with Plato a particular interest in the
most complex and perfect of souls, the human soul. It follows from this
interest that many of his remarks on phantasia, both in the De anima
and elsewhere, are concerned with it as a feature of human life. In
keeping with this human significance of phantasia in the thought of
Aristotle, the present paper proposes to examine the theme of phantasia
as it is presented in the De anima, that is, as a prelude to the analysis of
noein . Before turning to Aristotle’s text, however, we should begin with
some introductory considerations of the word phantasia itself.

1. Phantasia and “Appearing”
Although phantasia is conventionally rendered into English as “imagi¬
nation”, and is roughly identified with the faculty studied by later
thinkers under that name, this latinate term in its present-day associa¬
tions carries with it “sedimentations” which risk obscuring the original
force of the Greek word. To begin with, “imagination”, which derives
from imago and ultimately from imitor, carries the suggestion of “imita¬
tion”, and hence of “resemblance”, connotations which are not present
in the root meaning of phantasia . Moreover, the study of the imagina¬
tion as one of a number of distinct “ inner senses ” or as a specific faculty
located in the brain arises from later developments of the meaning of
phantasia which are foreign to the thought of Aristotle? And finally,
while “imagination” sometimes occurs in modern discussions as a
critical term of poetic theory, or to describe an aspect of scientific
genius, these uses, with their implication of an extraordinary power of
insight, spiritual vision, or discovery, are far removed from the primary
meaning of phantasia. Thus, although “imagination” may often be the
closest English approximation to Aristotle’s phantasia , we must bear in
 mind the extreme inappropriateness of these post-Aristotelian connota¬
tions of the term. In order to avoid them altogether, we shall leave
phantasia untranslated, allowing its meaning to emerge gradually in the
examination of Aristotle’s texts.
   Since the word phantasia is not found in Greek literature before the
dialogues of Plato, in which it occurs only seven times,5 Aristotle is
 3 De anima, I, 1, 402b3-5.
 4 The physiological study of the “imagination” seems to have its origins in Galen’s
   medical researches, which make use of Aristotle’s remarks on to phantastikon . See the
   references in Harry Austryn Wolfson, “The Internal Senses in Latin, Arabic and
   Hebrew Philosophical Texts”, Harvard Theological Review 28 (1935), 71-73.
 5 According to Leonard Brandwood, A Word Index to Plato (Leeds: W. S. Maney &
   Son, 1976), these are: Republic, II, 382el0; Theaetetus, 152cl, 161e8; Sophist, 260c9,
                                                                        Phantasia        485

apparently the first writer both to have used it regularly and to have
discussed its meaning at length. It is, however, formed from older and
less technical words which offer some suggestive indications of its
original significance. Although Aristotle’s derivation of it from phaos
(“light”)6 may not be strictly correct, both words seem ultimately to
come from the verb phad, which means “to give light, shine, beam,
especially of the heavenly bodies” .7 From this latter word were derived
the two verbs phaind (“to show”), with its frequent middle form phai-
nomai (“to appear”), and phantazo (“to make visible, appear, show
oneself”), and thence the verbal nouns phantasia and phantasma .6
Both Plato and Aristotle closely associate phantasia with phainomai in
contexts which suggest that phantasia designates the result of the action
of appearing, and might, like phainomenon, be translated simply as
“appearance”.9 In terms of its genealogy, then, phantasia would seem
to indicate the effect of a prominent or merely noticeable self¬
presentation of something to eyesight, though it quickly seems to have
acquired the wide meaning of “a presentation to consciousness,
whether immediate or in memory, whether true or illusory”.10 Thus,
while derived from a term pointing to the spectacle of the heavenly
bodies, phantasia itself names the manifestation of anything before
man, perhaps especially a display in the sensible, and above all, in the
visible world, but also including any presentation in dreams, memories,
fancies, and delusions. Taken together, the array of all such appearances
forms the scene of the pre-philosophic dimension of human experience
which precedes and conditions man’s subsequent questions about the
truth of things.11
    260e4, 263 d6 , 264a6. On the po ssib ility that the term may have been used by some of the
    pre-Socratics, see the first chapter of Murray Wright Bundy, The Theory of Imagina¬
    tion in Classical and Medieval Thought (Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 1927).
 6 De anima, III, 3, 429a3-4.
 7 Henry George Liddell and Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon (Oxford: Clarendon
    Press, 1968), “ phad" .
 8 Ibid., ad loc.
 9 See, forinstance, Theaetetus , 152cl , and Metaphysics, IV, 5, 1010b1-4. On the signifi¬
    cance of the phainomena for Aristotle, see Martha Craven Nussbaum, “Saving Aris¬
    totle’s Appearances”, in Malcolm Schofield and Martha Craven Nussbaum, eds.,
    Language and Logos: Studies in Ancient Greek Philosophy Presented to G. E. L.
    Owen (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982), 267-293.
10 Liddell and Scott, Lexicon, "phantasia”.
1 1 In a manner different from that of the Greeks, modem German philosophy seems also
    to have had a keen appreciation of the concrete immediacy and human importance of,
    and of the difficulty in speaking about, the phainomena. For the origins of the discus¬
    sion in Leibniz’ description of bodies as phaenomena realia and in Kant’s radical
     modem revision of the meaning of the phenomena , see the article on" Erscheinung” in
    Historisches Wdrleibtich der Philosophic (Basel and Stuttgart: Schwabe, 1972). For
    the meaning of “phenomenon” in the various “ phenomenologies’’ of Hegel, Husserl,
    and Heidegger, see Herbert Spiegelberg, The Phenomenological Movement: An His¬
    torical Introduction (2 vols.; 2nd ed.; The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1965), 14, 126, and
     321 respectively. It might be observed that while the history of Greek philosophy
    proceeds from the Protagorean doctrine of the truth of the phainomena to the crucial
     Platonic distinction between the phainomena and the onta (Republic, X, 596e4), the
486 Dialogue

   The English word “appearance” connotes an interesting polarity,
since an appearance is always both of something and for someone, and
itself seems to be engendered in a unique coming-together of something
and someone: an appearance of one thing is not like that of another,
while, on the other hand, the appearance of something to one person
may differ from its appearance to another.12 This duality parallels a
similar polarity in the word phantasia which is reflected in two basic
uses which Aristotle makes of the word, uses described by Bonitz as
speciem rei obiectae ... sive veram sive fallacem and as earn actionem
qua rerum imagines animo informamus and by J. Freudenthal as
Aussehen or Erscheinung and as Vorstellung or Einbildung14 respec¬
tively. While this sharp distinction of meaning may conceal an important
ambiguity of the word, it seems clear that Aristotle uses the term both in
an “objective” sense, to describe the species or “look” of something,
and in a “subjective’’ sense, to describe the action of the soul in grasping
such a “look”.15 The first sense occurs mostly in his physical writings,
 usually as naming the “look” of one of the heavenly bodies or of a
colour; the second usage is found in the psychological treatises, and
 describes a certain action by which the soul presents something to itself.
Since our interest is in the human activity of phantasia , we shall all but
 exclusively be concerned with the “psychological” or “subjective”
 meaning of the word. This concern leads us to consider the special
 nature of certain kinds of “appearances” or “presentations”, namely,
 those Aristotle calls phantasmata .
   Setting aside the transferred {kata metaphoran) meanings of the
      —
 word perhaps referring to the “objective” sense just mentioned16
   history of German philosophy seems to reverse this progression, beginning with Kant’s
                                                                                           —
   distinction between the phenomena and the noumena, and ending with phenomen¬
   ology’s exclusive attention to the appearances. This latter development also coincides
   with the growth of “historicism”, a modern version of the Protagorean doctrine that
   “man is the measure of all things”.
12 The continual engendering of unique and unrepeatable appearances by the ever-
   renewed union of sense and sensible things is a central point in the discussion of the first
   definition of knowledge in Plato’s Theaetetus (151d3-186e12). The fascination to which
   this perpetual novelty gives rise is, of course, an important Platonic theme.
13 H. Bonitz, Index Aristotelians (2nd ed.; Graz: Akademische Druck—U. Verlagsan-
   stalt, 1955), "phantasia” .
14 J. Freudenthal, Ueberden Begriff des Wortes PHANTASIA bei Aristoteles (Gottingen:
                            —
   Druck der Universitats Buchdruckerei von E. A. Huth, 1863), 15-16.
15 It should be mentioned that “look” is the English word chosen by Jacob Klein to
   translate Plato’s terms eidos and idea ; see Plato’s Trilogy (Chicago, IL: University of
   Chicago Press, 1977), 3. The visual terminology of species, Erscheinung and “look”,
   reflects the root meaning of phantasia , but is somewhat misleading, since Aristotle will
   relate the action of phantasia to sensation in general. The double sense of phantasia is
   paralleled in the related term doxa , which, in the writings of Plato, also shows both an
   “objective” and a “subjective” meaning. See Yvon Lafrance, La Theorie Platoni-
   cienne de la Doxa (Montreal: Bellarmin; and Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1981), 22.
16 For other suggestions of what Aristotle has in mind here, see Freudenthal, Ueber den
   Begriff, 30, and Martha Craven Nussbaum, Aristotle’s De motu animalium: Text with
   Translation, Commentary and Interpretative Essays (Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni¬
    versity Press, 1978), 252-255.
                                                                  Phantasia 487

Aristotle says that phantasia is that in virtue of which we say that any
phantasma comes to be in us: kath’hen legomen phantasma ti hemin
gignesthai.11 This terse, almost tautologous definition contains some
interesting features. Note, first of all, that Aristotle is describing phan¬
tasia according to what seems to be the ordinary way of speaking: it is
that by which we say a phantasma comes to be in us. Note, too, that
phantasia is made to account for the genesis of the phantasma . But what
is this phantasma within us which is recognized in ordinary discourse?
Like its cognates, phantasma suggests the action of appearing, but more
specifically it points to the transfer of an appearance from its origin in
that which appears into another medium. Thus, Plato uses phantasmata
to name the reflections which things cast into the unstable medium of
water, an example which vividly illustrates the difference between the
original which appears and its separated and transformed appearance.
Often, however, Plato’s use of the word indicates a deceptive appear¬
ance in particular, suggesting that phantasmata are reflections which
cannot be trusted to show the truth about their originals.18
   The striking difference between Plato’s use of phantasma and that of
 Aristotle is that, while Plato makes it describe every sort of reflected
 appearance, including visible reflections, mistaken impressions,
dreams, and the “reflections” of things in speech,19 Aristotle uses it
exclusively to describe the inner appearances or “reflections” which
 are evident in such activities as dreaming and remembering, instances in
 which we ourselves are the medium into which the reflected appear¬
 ances are cast, transformed, and separated from their originals. These
 inner phantasmata are clearly a special kind of appearance, since, as
 has been said, an appearance usually seems to involve a union between
 something which appears and someone to whom it appears, or a union of
 the outer world and an inner act of recognition. It seems, however, that
 an appearance can become wholly interiorized, so that the subjective
 pole becomes overwhelmingly predominant: the inner appearance is not
 only for the individual to whom it appears, but it is for him alone , since
 he contains it.
    Aristotle’s description of phantasia as that in virtue of which
 {kath’hen} these inner appearances are generated is somewhat clarified
 by the definition of kath’ho in Metaphysics , V, 18, which states that this
 term has as many senses as aition (“cause”).20 Thus, phantasia as it is
 commonly understood would seem to signify the hypothesis of an under¬
 lying action of the soul, a moving cause which serves to account for the
 presence in us of phantasmata. In pursuing this supposition, then, we
 are led to consider the genesis of these inner appearances and the action
 of phantasia and its phantasmata in the life of the human soul.
17 De anima, III, 3, 428al-2.
18 Republic, VI, 510al; II, 382a2; Sophist, 236b7; c3, 4, 7; 239c9.
19 Republic, VI, 510al; IX, 584a9; Timaeus, 46a2; Sophist, 267a4.
20 !022al9-20.
488 Dialogue

2. The Context of the Discussion of Phantasia
2.1. The Plan of the De Anima
The De anima's remarks on phantasia prior to the thematic discussion
of III, 3 are few and fragmentary. We learn that thinking seems to be
intimately related to phantasia', that phantasia, along with desire, is
concomitant with the power of sensation; that the place of phantasia
among the powers of the soul is unclear and must be dealt with as a
separate question; that the animals which possess phantasia live ac¬
cording to it; that phantasia is somehow involved with the production of
voice; and that phantasiai persist in the sense organs after the sense
objects are gone.21 Apart from the vague remark at 414bl6, nothing has
prepared us for a thematic discussion of phantasia at this point, and
even within III, 3 the theme of phantasia seems to emerge incidentally
in the course of a discussion of the difference between sensing and
thinking. This discussion is apparently intended to provide a transition
between the treatment of sensation (II, 5-III, 2) and that of nous (III,
4-8). For our purposes it is important to note first of all that the account
of phantasia is required for this development. Before focussing on this
transition itself, however, we might raise a question about its two terms:
what is Aristotle’s rationale in passing from the subject of sensation to
the subject of thought? While the progression from one cognitive power
 to another more complex one might strike us as an unremarkable didac¬
 tic procedure, it invites us to consider the overall plan and coherence of
 the De anima and the peculiar nature of Aristotle’s approach to the
study of the soul. Such a consideration is appropriate to our theme: as
 we shall see, the analysis of phantasia contains implications which
 involve some of the most far-reaching and original conclusions of Aris¬
 totle’s investigation of the soul. Our immediate concern, then, is to
 situate the chapter on phantasia within the structure of the De anima.
    Although the treatise contains clear and frequent articulations of its
 topics which suggest careful composition and edition, the overall plan of
 the book, particularly of its latter half, is not easy to delineate. Certainly,
 the first chapter is introductory, and is followed by four chapters which
 pursue Aristotle’s normal procedure of examining the opinions of his
 predecessors. Furthermore, the first two chapters of Book II clearly
 take up the concern, announced in the introduction, with finding a
 universal definition of the soul. Then, after an analysis of the different
 psychic powers possessed by different kinds of souls (II, 3), the ac¬
 tivities of nutrition (II, 4), sensation (II, 5-III, 2), phantasia (III, 3),
 thought (III, 4-8), and locomotion (III, 9-11) are taken up in turn, fol¬
 lowed by some further remarks on sensation (III, 12-13). What is the
 ordering principle behind the portion of the treatise which follows III, 3?
21 I, 1, 403a8-10; II, 2, 4I3b22-23; 3, 414bl6, 415al0-ll; 8, 420b29-33; III, 2, 425b24-25.
                                                                 Phantasia 489

Clearly, the latter portion of the book is concerned with the attributes,
powers or “parts” of the soul,22 and Aristotle seems to be following the
general plan sketched in the introduction according to which first the
essence of the soul, and then the properties of which the essence is the
cause, are to be treated in turn:23 after the definition of the soul’s essence
is determined in II, 1-2, the treatise turns to the characteristic properties
of this essence.24 Our question thus becomes: how is the discussion of
the properties of soul organized?
   One complication of Aristotle’s approach arises from the fact that,
although he is seeking a universal definition of soul, something which
has not previously been attempted, he insists nevertheless that different
kinds of soul, like different geometrical figures, each require their own
definition.25 The identification of soul by the presence of life, and the
understanding of life as the cause of various vital activities, suggest that
perhaps souls may be distinguished in terms of these activities.26 In II, 3
Aristotle follows up this line of thought, distinguishing five powers of
soul (nutrition, sensation and desire, locomotion and thought) which
give rise to four grades of life: plants, immobile and moving animals, and
men. The chapter repeats this hierarchy of living things in this order
twice,27 and thus leads us to expect that each of the kinds of life is to be
 treated in terms of its distinctive power. And so the text proceeds, at
least through the first two levels, discussing first plants and nutrition
 (II, 4) and then animals and sensation (II, 5-III, 2). But from III, 3
onwards the original ordering of powers becomes somewhat askew.
 First of all there is the discussion of phantasia, which has not been
clearly isolated as a distinct power and does not distinguish a grade of
life. Then, the discussion of the locomotive power does not closely
follow the treatment of sensation, as we have been led to expect it
 should: rather, there is first an account of nous, and only thereafter a
 discussion of locomotion. Again, the theme of nous is carried over into
 the discussion of locomotion in chapters ten and eleven. Moreover, the
 faculty of desire, which apparently did not distinguish a grade of life and
 was linked with sensation,28 appears in chapter ten to characterize the
22 "... A. considers himself entitled to use indifferently the terms morion, arche,
   dynamis, and diaphora throughout.” R. D. Hicks, Aristotle: De anima, with Transla¬
   tion, Introduction and Notes (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1907), 550.
23 I, 1, 402a7-8.
24 The overall plan of the treatise would seem to be as follows:
       1. Introduction (I, 1)
      2. Historical Background (I, 2-5)
      3. Investigation of the Soul
             1) Its essence (II, 1-3)
             2) Its properties (II, 4-111,13)
25 I, 2, 402b5-9; II, I, 412a4-6; II, 3, 414b20-2L
26 II, 2, 413a20-25.
27 414a32-bl9, 414b33-415al3.
28 II, 3, 414b5-16.
490   Dialogue

locomotive grade of life. Finally, chapter nine takes up the question of
the different parts of soul anew as if it had not previously been discussed
in II, 3. Clearly, III, 3-11 constitutes a disruption in the plan outlined in
II, 3 and followed to the end of III, 2. The themes of phantasia , thought,
locomotion, and desire seem to be interwoven in a way which escapes
the clear plan suggested in II, 3. 29
   There is, however, another way in which III, 3-11 is set apart from the
discussion of the soul’s powers which precedes it. The section appears
to have two parts, which consider the powers of thought (nous, ch. 3-8)
and locomotion (kinesis, ch. 9-11) respectively. Each of these parts is
introduced with the same enunciation of two fundamental properties of
soul, namely, cognition and locomotion.30 It is something of a surprise to
encounter these remarks, especially at the beginning of chapter three,
since this enumeration of two properties harks back to a similar enumer¬
ation made in the discussion of earlier thinkers in Book I. This twofold
characterization of the soul first occurred near the very beginning of the
treatise, after the introduction, and movement and some form of cogni¬
 tion recur through Book I as the primary features of the soul according
 to Aristotle’s predecessors.31 In Book II and in the first two chapters of
 Book III this twofold characterization is not once mentioned, and the
 reader is led to believe that it has been displaced by Aristotle’s division
 of five powers distinguishing four grades of life. We may note, however,
 that there is a gradual transformation of this twofold division of the
 soul’s powers: in I, 2 Aristotle first describes the two powers as motion
 (kinesis) and sensation (aisthanesthai),32 then later as movement
 (kineisthai) on the one hand and knowledge (gindskein) and sensation
 (aisthanesthai) on the other;33 in III, 3, where the twofold division
 suddenly reappears, he speaks of motion (kinesis) on the one hand and
 of thought (noein), judgment (krinein) and sensation (aisthanesthai) on
 the other;34 in III, 9 he speaks, most clearly, on the one hand of the
  “distinguishing” power (to kritikon), which is the work of thought
 (dianoia) and sensation (aisthesi.s), and on the other hand of locomotion
29 Insofar as the original plan is followed, the outline would be:
      The Soul
         1) Its essence (II, 1-3)
         2) Its properties
                1. Nutrition (II, 4)
                2. Sensation (II, 5-III, 2)
                Transition from sensation to nous (III, 3)
                3. Nous (III, 4-8)
                4. Locomotion (III, 9-11)
30 427al7-19, 432al5-17.
31 2, 403b25-27, 404b7-9, 404b27-28; 3, 405b31; 4, 408a35-bl; 5, 404bl9-25. At 405bl2 and
   409b21 a third feature of the soul, its “bodiless” (asomaton) character, is added.
32 403b25-27.
33 404b7-9.
34 427al7-19.
                                                                      Phantasia 491

(kinein ten kata topon kinesin) 35 From the standpoint of III, 9 the
division of powers, and of the corresponding discussions of them, would
seem to be: the distinguishing power, as treated in II, 5-III, 8; and
locomotion, as treated in III, 9-11. Yet this scheme abandons the division
according to grades of life. Moreover, the distinguishing power plays a
significant role in locomotion, and seems therefore to be more funda¬
mental. Thus, the latter part ofthe treatise, from II, 5 onwards, might be
thought to be devoted to explaining the kritikon33
    Yet a third way of approaching the latter part of the treatise might be
based on Aristotle’s division, in his introduction, between powers which
are peculiar to the soul and those which are common to soul and body.37
His repeated suggestions that nous is what he means by the first of
these38 seem to indicate that the entire treatise is directed towards the
discussion of the power of thought. This would not be surprising, since
the distinctively Aristotelian theme of nous provides the culmination
and climax of the De anima , as likewise of the Posterior Analytics , the
Metaphysics, and the Nicomachean Ethics . And since the discussion of
nous spills over into the account of kinesis , for which it is a presupposi¬
 tion, it might be thought that nous is the theme embracing the whole of
 III, 3-11. This section is further complicated by two considerations
 introduced by Aristotle: the first is that he regards nous as a twofold
 power, being both theoretical and practical, and that it therefore merits
 consideration both independently, as a “distinguishing” faculty, and
 within the account of kinesis ; the second is that he takes the discussion
 of animal locomotion as an appropriate occasion to discuss such moral
 topics as the practical intellect, the practical syllogism, choice, wish,
 desire and the good. Thus, III, 3-8 and 9-11 thematically overlap, since,
 on the one hand, the theme of nous extends into practical questions,
 while, on the other hand, the theme of kinesis gives rise to moral
 considerations. Since the nous praktikos appears at the intersection of
 the discussion of to kritikon and to kinetikon , one might be led to the
 strange conclusion that the De anima is primarily a text of moral philos-

35 432al5-17.
36 Thus the outline would be:
       The Soul
          1) Its essence (II, 1-4)
          2) Its “distinguishing” power {to kritikon)
                 1. to kritikon in itself (II, 5-III, 8)
                 2. to kritikon and locomotion (III, 9-11)
   It is not inappropriate to include II, 4 in the section on the soul’s essence, since its
   discussion of powers, acts, and objects, and ofthe different ways in which the soul is a
   “cause”, continue the general account of the soul, and because the discussion of the
   nutritive power indicates an intrinsic relation between the soul as such and nourish¬
   ment (416b!1-12).
37 402a9-10.
38 I, 1, 403a8; 4, 408bl8-29; 5, 41ibl8-19; II, 2, 413b24-27; 3, 415al 1-12.
492 Dialogue

ophy. At any rate, nous is a continuing and unifying theme throughout
III, 3-11.39

2.2. The Introduction of De, Anima, III, 3
Whether or not a single consistent account of the De anima's structure
can be given , there is certainly an important division of the treatise at the
beginning of III, 3. The abstract and isolated consideration of sensation
is here left behind, and attention is turned to thinking, a much more
complex topic which ultimately involves discussion not only of the
power of nous, but also of sensation, locomotion, desire, and the good.
Its most immediate requirement, however, is evidently an examination
of phantasia. Let us see how Aristotle broaches this theme.
   His first concern is to establish a distinction between thinking (noein
and phronein) and sensation, which resemble one another, since in both
cases the soul distinguishes (krinei) something and recognizes (gnorizei)
beings. In response to earlier philosophers, who took thinking to be
something bodily, and who held that like is known, as well as sensed, by
like, Aristotle objects that such a theory is unable to account for error. It
is clear, he continues, that neither phronein nor noein are sensation: not
 phronein , since it belongs to only a few animals, while sensation belongs
 to all; and not noein , because while sensation is always true of its proper
 objects and belongs to all animals, dianoeisthai may be false and belongs
 only to those who possess logos.40 Thus appealing to an immediate
 recognition of the absence both of practical wisdom and of logos in
 many animals who possess sensation, Aristotle is quickly able to distin¬
 guish between thinking and sensation.
    Here he abruptly introduces the subject of phantasia , distinguishing it
 from both sensation and thought (dianoia)\ it does not occur without
 sensation, nor does judgment (hypolepsis) occur without it.41 He then
 goes on to elaborate the difference between phantasia and thinking.
 What is the motive for this sudden change of subject? Thus far, the main
 theme of the chapter has been “thinking” in a very broad sense, and
 Aristotle is attempting to isolate thinking from that which resembles it.
 The danger of confusing thinking with sensing lay in a materialistic view
 of knowledge and in a simplistic understanding of the principle that like
39 The third and final division of the De anima's latter portion would be:
      The Soul
          1) Its essence (II, 1-4)
          2) Its powers
                 1. Sensation, the power shared by soul and body (II, 5-III, 2)
                 2. Nohs, the power proper to the soul (III, 3-11)
   In all three ways of dividing the text, the concluding chapters on sensation (III, 12-13)
   stand apart. They seem to form a sort of appendix to the treatise (cf. II, 2, 414al-2)anda
   transition to the De sensu et sensato.
40 427al9-bl4.
41 428al5-16.
                                                                        Phantasia 493

is known by like. Wherein now lies the danger of mistaking phantasia
for thinking? This possible confusion seems to have two basic sources.
   The first is that both thinking and phantasia may occur in the absence
of a sensible object. The example that Aristotle offers of mnemonists
ordering their images within themselves42 illustrates this well. While
sensation requires the physical presence of its object, phantasia, like
thinking, has for its immediate object something interior which remains
and may be “arranged” for consideration in the absence of sensible
things.43 Thus, both thinking and phantasia have an interiority and an
independence of the sensible world which makes them resemble one
another. The ordinary view perhaps does not distinguish between
thoughtful reflection employing logos and the inspection of phantas-
mata, and Aristotle will show how closely these two are in fact inter¬
 woven.
   The second respect in which thinking and phantasia are alike is that
 both may similarly serve as inner springs of animal activity: “Again,
 because imaginations persist in us and resemble sensations, living crea¬
 tures frequently act in accordance with them {kaf antas'), some, viz. , the
 brutes, because they have no mind (noun), and some, viz., men, be¬
 cause the mind (noun) is temporarily clouded over by emotion, or
 disease, or sleep.”44 This resemblance later leads Aristotle to allow that
 phantasia may actually be called a certain noesis:
These two, then, appetite (orexis) and mind (nous) are clearly capable of causing move¬
ment if, that is, one regards imagination (phantasia) as some sort of thinking process
(noesin); for men often follow their imaginations (phantasai) contrary to knowledge, and
in living creatures other than man there is neither thinking (noesis) nor calculation
(logismos), but only imagination (phantasia).45

Thus, from the point of view of animal activity, as well as of human
activity in so far as it is generated by the passions of the body, phantasia
and nous seem to perform analogous originating functions and to be
interchangeable one for the other.
  Since, both from its interiority and from its orientation to action,
phantasia has the appearance of a kind of thinking, Aristotle is thus
compelled to distinguish these two cognitive activities. He at once does
so in a cursory way, as he has distinguished thinking from sensing, by
mentioning two clear indications of their difference: the first is that the
exercise of phantasia rests with us, as in the case of the mnemonic
arrangement of images, while judging something to be so (doxazein) is
not circumscribed by our activity, but involves some reference beyond
us by which it is true or false; the second is that when our judgment
 42 427bl8-20.
 43 Cf. Il, 5, 417bl8-27.
 44 III, 3, 429a4-8. The texts of Aristotle are quoted in the translation by W. S. Hett in the
    Loeb Classical Library edition of On the Soul, Parra Natttralia, On Breath (Cam¬
    bridge, MA: Harvard University Press; and London: William Heinemann, 1957).
 45 III, 10, 433a9-12.
494 Dialogue

confronts something fearful or terrible we are immediately moved, while
phantasia coolly regards such affecting scenes as one would a picture.46
These indications are clearly meant to compel the reader’s immediate
assent and to allow Aristotle to proceed with the assumption that phan¬
tasia and thinking are distinct activities of the soul. Yet they are not
sufficient to permit him to pass directly beyond phantasia to a discus¬
sion of noein .
   In a remark introducing the necessary excursus on phantasia , Aristo¬
tle anticipates a major theme of his analysis of thinking, namely, that the
activity of noein in man is somehow double, comprising one dimension
which belongs to the sensible world and one which does not: “As for
thought (noein), since it is distinct from perception (aisthanesthai), and
is held to comprise imagination and judgment (to men phantasia dokei
einai to de hypolepsis), it will be best to discuss it after having completed
our analysis of imagination (phantasia)."41 Having once been touched
on, the theme of phantasia cannot now be abandoned. This is not only
because it is interesting in its own right, as a power of the soul which has
yet to be defined: Aristotle in fact has thus far expressed little needfor an
account of phantasia in his investigation of the soul. It is rather because
an understanding of phantasia will be necessary to the explanation of
 the human activity of noein. While phantasia is often found in isolation
from noein, in man as well as in the other animals, its primary signifi¬
cance for Aristotle in the De anima lies in its instrumentality with
 respect to this human activity.

3. The Definition of Phantasia
Although the introductory section of De anima, III, 3 points forward to
the theme of nous, Aristotle’s analysis of phantasia itself depends
heavily on his preceding account of aisthesis. In searching for a defini¬
tion of phantasia, we must see how the inner appearances have their
roots in the act of sensation.
   Among the many and complex ways in which things can “appear” to
man, the most fundamental and paradigmatic seems to be the striking
and continuous presentation of things to his senses. The close resem¬
blance between sensation and the inner appearances is dramatically
evident in the phantasia of dreaming, in which the dreamer takes him¬
self to be actually seeing and hearing things beyond himself. It is thus not
surprising that Aristotle defines phantasia a number of times, in very
different contexts, as a function of aisthesis.48 On the other hand, in his
46 III, 3, 427b17-24.
47 427b27-29.
48 De anima. III, 3, 429al-2; De insomniis, 1, 459al7-18; Rhetoric, I, 11, 1370a27. It is
   customary to compare the Rhetoric's definition of phantasia as a “certain weak
   sensation” (aisthesis tis asthenes) with Hobbes’ remark in Leviathan, ch. 2, that
   “imagination is therefore nothing but decaying sense”.
                                                                     Phantasia 495

discussion of the law of non-contradiction, he pointedly remarks that
phantasia is not the same thing as aisthesis.4^
  The identification of phantasia and aisthesis is associated by Plato
and Aristotle with the name of Protagoras, which they take to be
emblematic of an elaborate doctrine of the instability of the world and of
the subjective and material character of knowledge. Both present the
Protagorean theme of the truth of the phainomena from a hostile point of
view, answering it, on the one hand, with a doctrine of an immobile and
immaterial being, and, on the other hand, with a firm distinction between
sensation and knowledge.50 Thus set against the background of the
opposition between ousia and genesis, the theme of phantasia as a
distinct activity of the soul arises, as in the De anima, the De memoria,
and the De insomniis ,51 in the gap opened up by the separation between
sensing and thinking. Phantasia seems to resemble each of these in
certain ways, which may explain the Protagorean confusion between
them, while it also serves as the link between them in the Aristotelian
explanation of knowledge.
   Aristotle opens the thematic discussion of phantasia with five indica¬
tions which distinguish it from sensation. Among these, the decisive
point seems to be that an “appearing” (phainetai) may occur when the
sense-powers are inoperative, as in dreams or when one’s eyes are
closed, so that phantasia cannot be the same thing as sensation.52 On the
other hand, he observes as a matter of fact that phantasia seems not to
occur without sensation, since both take place in the same subjects and
are directed to the same objects.53 It is in establishing the precise relation
between these two activities that Aristotle arrives at his definition of
phantasia.
   Sensation, according to Aristotle, is the distinctive power of animals,
one which may be generally described as a passive “being moved”
(kineisthai) or “altered” (alloiousthai) or “acted upon” (paschein).
More specifically, it is a process of actualization (energein) in which the
passive sense-power is impinged upon by its object, somewhat in the
way that fuel is kindled by fire; in an interpretation of the saying that
“like is known by like”, Aristotle explains this actualization as an
assimilation {homoiotai} in which the sense-power begins as unlike its
object, and is transformed into a likeness of it. Finally, sensation in¬
volves the reception of sensible forms without their matter, just as wax
49 Metaphysics , IV, 5, 1010b3.
50 The Platonic response to Protagoras is found in Socrates’ uncovering of the presuppo¬
   sitions and consequences of Theaetetus’ definition of episteme as aisthesis (Theae-
   tetus, 151d3-186el2); phantasia is identified with aisthesis near the beginning of the
   argument (152c1). Aristotle alludes to this discussion while opposing to the Protagorean
   view of the phainomena the famous “law of non-contradiction” (Metaphysics, IV, 5,
   1010bl2).
51 III, 3, 427al7-bl4; 1, 449b9-30; 1, 458bl-22.
52 428a5-16.
53 428bll-13.
496   Dialogue

takes on the imprint, but not the material, of a seal.54 Sensation, then, is a
physical motion, a process of actualization, an assimilation, and the
reception of a dematerialized form.
   From among the various elements of this account of sensation, Aristo¬
tle, in his explanation of phantasia, selects the simplest and most
general, namely, the point that sensation is a certain physical motion
(kinesis). Observing that something which is moved by another may in
turn move something else, and that phantasia itself seems to be some
sort of motion, one which depends on sensation, he quickly arrives at the
definition of phantasia as “a movement produced by sensation actively
operating” (kinesis hypo tes aistheseos tes kat’energeian gigno-
menes).55 Such a secondary movement necessarily resembles sensation,
which in turn is an assimilation to the sensible object; moreover, the
movement of phantasia evidently continues in the absence of the sensi¬
ble object and the inoperancy of the sense-power.56 Thus phantasia , as
the power whereby sensation is capable of generating a likeness of itself
which survives it, might be likened to a reproductive faculty: through it,
the momentary, stillborn life of sensations is perpetuated in their off¬
spring.57
    Although this brief sketch of phantasia in terms of kinesis requires
much amplification, it is important first to see why in itself it is signifi¬
cant for Aristotle. On the one hand, by describing phantasia in terms of
one of the most fundamental and manifest features of the physical
 world,58 it specifies phantasia, in contradistinction to noein, as an
organic, bodily event; and therefore subject to all the limitations from
 which nous in its passionless incorporeity is exempt.59 On the other
 hand, in characterizing phantasia as a secondary motion arising from
 sensation, Aristotle seems to be appealing to ordinary experience of the
 inner appearances. His book on dreams, which further develops the De
 anima's account of phantasia, investigates this ordinary experience in
 greater detail.
    After noting the fact that the experience (pathos) which occurs in
 sensation persists when sensations themselves have ceased, the second
 chapter of the De insomniis compares this persistence to the career of
 serially moved projectiles, the movement of one of which may continue
 when its mover is at rest. Something similar occurs in the “movement”
 of change of state (alloiosis), as when something heated transmits its
 heat to something else; and as with sensation itself, whose actualization
 is also a certain alloiosis, which explains why its pathos persists when
 the sense organs are no longer active. As evidence of the fact itself,
54 De anima, II, 5 and 12.
55 III, 3, 428b 10-1 1, 429al-2.
56 428b 14, 429a4-5.
57 Cf. note 13 above.
58 Cf. Physics, I, 1, 185al4.
59 De anima, III, 5, 430al7-18.
                                                                       Phantasia 497

Aristotle invites us to consider the effect of gazing at something continu¬
ously for a while, and then abruptly shifting our attention to something
different: in turning from sunlight to darkness, from one colour to
another, or from moving things to things at rest, we notice that some
trace of the first object appears (phainetaf) for a time in our considera¬
tion of the second.60
   Aristotle finds in these slight indications a sufficient explanation of
dreaming: by day, when our senses and thought are active, the persisting
traces of sensation are obscured, as a small fire is by a greater; but when
these present-directed activities are at rest, the continuing reverbera¬
tions of sensation are left to occupy the centre of attention.61 This
explanation suggests that the activity of phantasia may prove to be a
problem for its subject, since the difference between present sensation
and the present persistence of past sensation seems to be a kind of
tension, potentially dividing man between his present and his past,
between what confronts him in the world and what preoccupies him
within.
   The De insomniis also repeats the De anima's definition of phan¬
tasia, and in so doing it even more closely unites the powers of phan¬
tasia and aisthesisx
... the imaginative (phantastikon) is the same as the sensitive faculty, although the
imaginative and the sensitive are different in essence (einai)-, and since imagination
(phantasia) is the process set up by a sense faculty in a state of activity (he hypo tes
kat'energeian aistheseos gignomene kinesis), and a dream appears to be some sort of
mental image (phantasma) (for an image [phantasma] which appears in sleep, whether
simply or in a special sense, we call a dream); it is clear that dreaming belongs to the
sensitive faculty, but belongs to it qua imaginative (het phantastikon).62

It is difficult to know what to make of the remark that sensation and
phantasia are the same but different in einai.63 If the suggestion is that
the two are different activities of the same subject, both having the same
organic foundation, the “secondary movement” of phantasia requires
further physiological explanation.64 From the point of view of the De
anima, however, the account of phantasia now seems to be complete.
Its qualified identity with sensation explains why it is not a separate
power and does not determine a distinct kind of soul. As the inevitable
60 459a28-b23.
61 De insomniis, 3, 460b28-461a8.
62 1, 459al5-22.
63 For discussion of this formulation, see Nussbaum, Aristotle’s De motu animalium,
   234-236.
64 Aristotle’s account of the physiology of phantasia in terms of reflected sensations
   which are borne inward toward a central organ, and sometimes distorted or obscured,
   by the currents of the blood (461a8-462a8) may be scientifically naive, but is meta¬
   phorically precise, since the paradigmatic instance of a phantasma seems to be the
   visible, inevitably altered reflection of the outer appearances in the fluctuating element
   of water (cf. Republic, VI, 510al). See De prophetia in somno, 2, 464b9: the inner
   appearances (phantasmata) are much like the “images” (eiddla) found in water.
498 Dialogue

after-effect of sensation, phantasia is a dimension of the life of all animal
souls.65
   Apart from the concept of kinesis, there is one other feature from
Aristotle’s account of sensation which is carried over into his discussion
of phantasia, namely, the remark that sensation involves the reception
of form without matter. It is because this is so, he suggests, that sensa¬
tions and phantasiai remain in the sense organs even when the sensible
objects have gone.66 This lingering, resonating, echoing presence of
sensible forms freed from their original matter appears to be the essence
of phantasia for Aristotle. The movement in the sense-power caused by
the sensible object itself sets up a second movement which continues
after the sensation has ceased and the object has gone. The animal soul,
therefore, is not merely one which is in touch with its environment
through the cognition of sensation, but one which carries the reverberat¬
ing effects of its past encounters with sensible objects; it is not only a
receiver, but also a preserver and a storehouse, of the sensible forms of
things.67

4. Phantasia and Nous
It remains to show how Aristotle’s discussion of phantasia subserves
the analysis of noein which it introduces. What is the role of the persist¬
ing inner appearances in the activity of thinking?
   Taking up the delicate task of explaining the origin of thinking (noein)
in De anima, III, 4, Aristotle once again, as he had at the beginning of
chapter three, initiates the discussion with a comparison between think¬
ing and sensation. However, having been freed of the danger of confus¬
ing thinking with sensing, or with its offspring phantasia , the compari¬
son can now proceed more instructively. Like sensation, then, thinking
is a certain “being acted upon” (paschein) which is possible because
thought is receptive of (dektikon) and potentially (dunamei) identical
with the forms (eide) of beings. In thinking, as in sensing, cognition is
not to be understood by means of any a priori structure other than a
specific emptiness, openness, and susceptibility to the forms of things.
As the sense-power (aisthetikon) is to its objects, the aistheta, so, by
strict analogy, is nous to the noeta, with the crucial difference that,
unlike sensation, the operation of thought is free of any admixture
(amige), whether in the power or in its object, with matter and the
 body.68
65 Aristotle suggests a division between animals which have phantasia and those which
   do not (De anima, II, 3, 415al0-ll; III, 3, 428al0-l 1), but finally allows that even the
   imperfect animals possess an indeterminate phantasia (ibid., Ill, 11, 433b31-434a4).
66 De anima, III, 2, 425b23-25.
67 Thus Aristotle’ s phantasia resembles very much the memoria eloquently described by
   St. Augustine ( Confessions , X, 8-26): venio in campos et lata praetoria memoriae, ubi
   stmt thesauri inntimerabilitim imaainum de cuiusce modi rebus sensis invectarum . .
68 429al3-18.
                                                           Phantasia 499

   The comparison between sense and nous is further developed in
chapter eight. The soul is in a way all of the beings (onta)- for the beings
are either sensible (aistheta) or intelligible (noeta), and while knowl¬
edge is in a way knowable objects (episteta), so sensation is in a way
sensible objects. In what way are these powers their objects? Potentially
so. They are potentially identical, not with the beings as they are in
themselves, but with their forms (eide), which they are capable of taking
on.69 Just as sense is moved by and assimilated to its object by receiving
its form, so thought is similarly affected by its object. The human soul’s
two principal cognitive powers enable it to extend to and identify with
the two corresponding fields of beings because these powers, while
empty of themselves, are receptive of and open to the assimilating
influence of the eide of beings . Like the potentiality of matter, they are
nothing in themselves until they take on form.
   Beyond this similar structure of openness, on which Aristotle insists
so emphatically, these two parallel kinds of cognition have also a unify¬
ing relationship in the life of the human soul. Phantasia, which is a
modulation of the sensitive faculty, and which, Aristotle has said, is
integral to the activity of noein , seems to point the way to the root unity
of sensing and thinking, and of the human soul itself in its identity with all
of the beings.
   The unity of sense and thought seems to be grounded in the limitations
of human nous, which, though immaterial in itself, is constrained to
operate within the sensible confines of space and time. It seems (hos
dokei), says Aristotle, that there is nothing which exists apart from
magnitude or the sensible beings.70 This “it seems” apparently signals a
description of the beings from the point of view of human noein , which,
for a reason left unstated by Aristotle, is compelled to include “the
continuous” in all its considerations, and to regard even the eternal
beings from within the horizon of time.71 But if all of the beings accessi¬
ble to human cognition come within the range of sensation, what makes
 the power of noein distinctive and not merely superfluous? Within the
context of the De anima, the answer to this question must be in terms of
 the object of noein.72 If nous and aisthesis are to be distinct, their
objects must be distinct. But since nous is surrounded on all sides by the
 sensible beings, where is it to find its special object? Not apart from or
 beyond the Sensible beings, Aristotle suggests, but rather within them:
 the noeta are present potentially (dunamei) in things which have mat¬
ter.73
   In order to understand this potential presence of the noeta in the
aistheta, we must unravel Aristotle’s compact account of the different
69 431b21-432al.
70 432a3-4.
71 De memoria et reminiscentia, 1, 450a7-9.
72 Cf. II, 4, 415a20-22.
73 III, 4, 430a6-7; 8, 432a4-5.
500   Dialogue

ways in which things may be considered in relation to matter.74 Distin¬
guishing between material things and “separated” (en aphairesei) or
mathematical things, he notes that in each case there is always a dif¬
ference between the thing itself in its substrate, whether this be matter or
“the continuous”, and the “being” (ehmz)ofthe thing in isolation from
its substrate. Material flesh is different from the isolated “being” (einai)
of flesh, just as that which is straight is different from the “essence” (ti
en einai) of straightness. Now Aristotle thinks that these two different
considerations of one and the same thing require to be discriminated
(krinei) by different faculties or by different modifications of one inclu¬
sive faculty. By sensation we distinguish hot and cold, and whatever else
pertains to material things in their materiality. By nous, however, we
disengage the einai of material things, that is, the immaterial and there¬
fore unmoving essence or mathematical aspect which is present within
them: “speaking generally, as objects are separable from their matter,
so also are the corresponding faculties of the mind (Ja peri ton noun)" .
The process of thinking, then, involves the uncovering and separation of
                         —
the intelligible form the “being” of the sensible thing which is the
                           —
specific object of nous from its enveloping sensible forms, such as the
 hot and the cold, which signify the presence of matter. This being so, it is
clear not just that noein is analogous to sensation, but that it relies on
sensation for its very object.
   Thus conveyed by means of the spatial metaphor of interiority , Aris¬
 totle’s point is clearly that nous discovers its distinctive object by its
 power of picking out an aspect of the aistheta which is hidden from
 sensation. Nevertheless, in stating a major theme of chapters seven and
 eight, he consistently prefers to say that nous thinks its eide in the
 phantasmata.75 That nous depends more immediately on the inter¬
 mediate faculty of phantasia than on the primary faculty of sensation is
 evidently of central importance in the discussion, and would appear to
 be the justification for the digression on phantasia in chapter three. Yet
 Aristotle does not make explicit the full significance of this dependency.
 Why do the phantasmata serve noein as aisthemata? Why is aisthesis
 of itself incompetent to provide nous with its object? By considering the
 essential role of phantasia in human thinking, we are led to reflect on the
 peculiar nature of human thinking itself.
    We may note at once that there is nothing exceptionable about sub¬
 stituting phantasmata for aisthemata in the act of noein. Since the
 secondary movement of phantasia takes on the imprint received in
 aisthesis and differs from aisthesis only in its continuance through time,
 there is no reason why nous cannot discover the einai of sensible things
  within the enclosing sensible forms preserved by phantasia. Our ques-
74 III, 4, 429b10-22.
75 7, 431al4-l5, 431b2; 8, 432a8-i0.
                                                                    Phantasia 501

tion is not why phantasia may serve nous equally with aisthesis, but
why it is valuable to nous in a way in which aisthesis cannot be.
   Aristotle’s text suggests a number of answers to this question, all of
them revolving around a single important point: noein, it seems, re¬
quires some degree of permanence in the sensible beings if it is to be able
to penetrate their material coverings and reveal to itself their intelligible
interiority. While it is true that their sensible forms afford some perma¬
nence to the material beings, this permanence is extremely unreliable,
subject as it is to the abrupt changes of the continually vanishing sensible
world. More crucially, the immediate human contact with the sensible
beings, aisthesis, is an instantaneous, ever-new event which is wholly
confined to the fragment of time Aristotle calls “the now’’ ,76 Even to the
extent that the sensible beings show some degree of constancy, our
sensitive apprehension of them is inevitably momentary and changing.
Aisthesis continually offers to nous its object, but only to at once
withdraw it and substitute a different object. Even if nous could follow
aisthesis through its transformations, glimpsing the essence or mathe¬
matical aspect of each object in rapid succession, these would not be
grasped as the unmoving or timeless einai which nous requires for its
object. The action of phantasia, which lends to the appearances a
stability which they do not have of themselves, would seem to be the
human soul’s response to this dilemma. By means of preserved phan-
tasmata, nous is enabled to continuously behold its timeless object,
even when the mediating sensible thing is past, absent or in motion.
    As an illustration of how phantasia extends the range of nous beyond
the now, we may note how necessary preserved phantasmata are to the
process of learning.77 Without this retention and accumulation of past
encounters with sensible beings, it is clear that there could be no acquisi¬
 tion of knowledge, but only a forgetful succession of insights. This
dependency of nous on phantasia for retention, however, reveals to us
 that of itself the power of thought has no memory. This in turn makes the
 similarity between nous and aisthesis even closer, since both seem to be
 purely present actualizations, aisthesis because of its confinement to
 the now, and nous because of its orientation to the timeless. This is not
 to say that phantasia is simply identical with memory, which Aristotle
 takes to be a special activity of phantasia in which the appearances
 (phantasmata) are regarded as images (eikones) of sensible objects in
 the past.78 Nevertheless, while it is not the pastness of the objects of
 phantasia as such to which noesis is directed,79 it is their deliverance
 from the passing of time which allows noesis to make use of them.
76 Physics, IV, 10-14; cf. Nicomachean Ethics, X, 4, 1 174al3-17.
77 Cf. De anima, HI, 8, 432a7-9.
78 De memoria et reminiscentia, 1, 450a25-451al4.
79 Aristotle says that objects of noesis are only incidentally objects of memory (ibid.,
   450a24-25).
502    Dialogue

   In a less direct way, phantasia also seems to extend the range of nous
into the future. Aristotle brings this out in showing the interplay of
practical thinking, desire, and the phantasmata:
So the thinking faculty (noetikon) thinks the forms (eide) in the mental images (pliantas-
masi). and just as in the sphere of sense what is to be pursued and avoided is defined for it,
so also outside sensation, when it is occupied with mental images (phantasmuton), is
moved. ... But sometimes by means of the images (phuittasmasin) or thoughts (noemasin)
in the soul, just as if it were seeing, it calculates and plans for the future in view of the
present; and when it makes a statement, as in sensation it asserts that an object is pleasant
or unpleasant, in this case it avoids or pursues; and so generally in action/0

Once having gained a foothold in time by means of phantasia, nous is
capable of putting its survey of the past into the service of a calculation
of the future. The importance of experience for practical wisdom is
clearly based on the preserving activity of phantasia.
   In an illuminating image, Aristotle compares the use made by the
noetic soul of phantasia to the role of diagrams in geometry:
It is impossible even to think (noein) without a mental picture (phantasmatos). The same
affection (pathos) is involved in thinking (noein ) as in drawing a diagram; for in this case
although we make no use of the fact that the magnitude of a triangle is a finite quality, yet
we draw it as having a finite magnitude. In the same way the man who is thinking (ho
noon), though he may not be thinking of a finite magnitude, still puts a finite magnitude
before his eyes, though he does not think of it as such . And even if the nature of the object is
quantitative, but indeterminate, he still puts before him a finite magnitude, although he
thinks of it as merely quantitative. Why it is impossible to think of anything without
continuity ( ton synechons) or to think of things which are timeless except in terms of time,
is another question/’

Phantasia resembles Plato’s “painter in the soul”, whose job is to
illustrate the text of the soul’s grasp of truth.82 As a geometer with a
portable slate, the noetic soul considers truth at its leisure, not because it
has no need of paradigmatic sensible images, but because it can produce
its own such images in the activity of phantasia. Phantasia preserves
the characteristic features of sensible things, such as their determinate
quantity, but nous is able to disregard these and to disengage the
immaterial “being” of material beings, much as a geometer makes use of
a specific right-angled triangle in deducing a truth about all such trian¬
gles . It might be noted in passing that this comparison perhaps indicates
that Aristotle is here responding to the Republic's account of the divided
line-, which also compares a certain kind of thinking (dianoia) to the
image-making activity of geometers . 83 But while Socrates there attempts
to describe a higher kind of thinking (noesis) which makes no use of
images whatsoever,84 Aristotle, like the Glauconofthe Republic, seems
80 De anima, III, 7, 431b2-IO. The role of phantasia in practical thinking and animal
   activity is further developed in De anima. III, 10-1 1, which is doctrinally parallel to De
   motn animalinm , 6-8. See, for discussion of these passages, Nussbaum, Aristotle’s De
   motif animalittm, 232-24).
81 De memoria et reminiscentia , 1, 449b31-450a9.
82 Philbens, 39b Iff.
83 VI, 51 lai, e2.
84 51 Id8.
                                                         Phantasia 503

to have difficulty in conceiving the possibility of such a pure and image¬
less thought.
    Nous, then, depends on phantasia to provide the relative steadiness
which it requires of its object. A further point, however, one which may
be even more important for an understanding of human activity, is that
the continuousness of noein is also a requirement of the very nature of
nous itself. Thinking, according to Aristotle, is both an activity which of
its very nature tends towards a constant, uninterrupted actualization,85
as well as the activity which man can perform most continuously.86 The
discussion of the life of nous at the conclusion of the Nicomachean
Ethics (X, 6-8) suggests that human thought, the imperfect image of the
life of the gods, takes its nobility and resemblance to the divine from the
degree to which it is able to operate with some continuity. It would seem
to be a measure of the importance of phantasia to man that it provides
some secure foundation, however intermittently, for this divine opera¬
tion in the life of a perishable being.
    The need for the hypothesis of phantasia in an account of the human
soul seems to arise from the complexity of human cognition, or, more
specifically, from the complex way in which human cognition is related
 to time. In souls characterized by sensation alone, phantasia gives rise
 to memory and desire, prolonging the now of sensation into past and
future for the sake of the animal’s preservation. In the noetic or human
 soul, however, phantasia is a step in man’s progression beyond time
 altogether, enabling him at certain points and for certain periods to pass
 beyond the confinements of sense to a consideration of the timeless
 natures of things. Tobe sure, the imperfection of this transcendence may
 be attributed to the origins of phantasia in the time-conditioned circum¬
 stances of sensation. But while phantasia may be the source of the
 failure of human noein to fully realize itself, it is also what makes this
 activity possible at all.
    The two prominent moments of human cognition, nous and aisthesis,
 are strikingly similar in their empty receptivity and in their total,
 present-directed absorption in the forms of beings, though the fleeting
 present of sensation and the abiding present of mathematical truth are
 apparently essentially disjoined. The union of these two presents, and
 hence the unity of the human soul, require the mediating activity of
 phantasia, which does not merely receive, as do nous and aisthesis, but
 also retains, in order that the present of sensation may be made to
 resemble the present of mathematics. Phantasia achieves this resem¬
  blance, however imperfectly, simply by allowing the movement of sen¬
 sation to persist. Because the impermanent sensible beings are thereby,
 in their reflections within us, caused to imitate the fixed noeta, human
  thinking in turn is enabled to imitate the noetic life of the gods.
85 De anima. III, 5, 430a22.
86 Nicomachean Ethics, X, 7, 1 177a23-25.
504 Dialogue

Conclusion
The role of phantasia in human life, according to Aristotle, goes far
beyond its contribution to the activity of noein, and is, in fact, perva¬
sive. That the discussion of the noetic soul occurs in the De anima just
after the treatment of phantasia , on which it depends, seems to under¬
line the human importance of this activity, which is apparently both
incessant in man and at the heart of his deepest concerns. As we have
just seen, the activity of thought, man’s highest endeavour, is impossible
without the concurrent activity of phantasia', moreover, when the
power of thought is eclipsed in man, as it easily is, he, like the other
animals, acts in accordance with phantasia,61 which, in its hidden in¬
teraction with the passions,8788 thus plays a significant part in his moral
and political life. Finally, the operation of man’s phantasia is not re¬
stricted to his waking life, but continues, perhaps even more intensely,
in his dreams . Whether awake or asleep, then, and whether thoughtful or
thoughtless, man never ceases to take his bearings in the world by means
of phantasia.
   Just as the roots of the word phantasia connote light, visibility, and
the heavenly phenomena, so phantasia in its “objective” sense, as has
been said, is often used by Aristotle when speaking of the heavenly
bodies and of colours. The milky way, comets, shooting stars, planets,
                              —
lightning, and rainbows all the celestial occurrences which orient man
                 —
in the cosmos each have their phantasia or “appearance”, which may
include their brightness, figure, swiftness, and presumably any aspect
 which they present to the earthly observer.89 Colours too, which for
 Aristotle are a primary source of our knowledge of the differences
 among things,90 each have their own unique “look” or phantasia.91
 These visible phenomena, both in their usefulness and in their charm,
 perhaps lend resonances to the word phantasia which carry over into its
 “subjective” meaning. As it occurs in Aristotle’s discussions of mem¬
 ory, dreaming, thinking, and desire, the term may suggest that the inner
 appearances which accompany such experiences have all the diverting
 prominence in human life which the more striking features of the visible
87 De anima, HI, 3, 429a4-8.
88 Aristotle offers some interesting examples of this interaction: the passions of anger,
   fear, confidence, and shame involve the activity of phantasia (Rhetoric, II, 2,
   1378a30-bl0; 5, 1382a21ff„ 1383al7; 6, 1383bl2-1384a22); the cowardly, the erotic, and
   the angry are easily deceived by slight resemblances between the inner appearances
   and the objects of their passions (De insomniis, 2, 460b4-l 1); phantasia is operative in
   the “self-image” which is a spur to victory, honour, and excellence (Rhetoric, I, 11,
   1 370b33; 1371a9, 19); the melancholy are particularly susceptible to the influence of the
   inner appearances (De memoria et reminiscentia , 2, 453al9).
89 Meteorologica, I, 3, 339a35; 5, 342b23; 6, 342b32; II, 9, 370al5; III, 4, 374b8; De
   mundo, 4, 395b6; Problemata, XV, 4, 91 la!3; XXVI, 12, 941b22.
90 De sensit et sensato, i, 437a5-7.
91 De coIoribus, 1, 791b 17; 2, 792a6, 8, b!5; 3, 793a25; Meteorologica, III, 2, 372b8; De
   sensu et sensato, 3 , 439b6.
                                                                     Phantasia 505

world have in the panorama of nature. By internalizing and preserving
such features, the power of phantasia provides man with a familiar
interior landscape which, in contrast with the sensible beings in them¬
selves, he may consult with confidence in its permanence. The relative
permanence conferred on the sensible beings by phantasia is necessary
and interesting to man in many practical ways , but its highest function is
to provide an index of orientation and differentiation to the power of
nous , and it is this highest function which points to the motive for the De
anima's digression on phantasia, as well as to the deepest meaning of
the inner appearances in the life of the human soul.
   Aristotle’s various suggestions concerning the role of phantasia in
human life would seem to be of particular relevance in our own time,
when the scene of the outer appearances has been overlaid and inten¬
sified with an unprecedented proliferation of man-made phantasmata .
Unlike the appearances of nature, these artificial phantasmata, which
are in large part “appearances” of man himself, are formed from the
beginning to become “inner appearances” and thereby to affect the
course of human thought, passion, and ultimately action. The transmis¬
sion of these phantasmata and the sharing of them among their receivers
give rise to preoccupations which suggest that phantasia, the private
and inner side of man’s contact with the sensible beings, paradoxically
 has its greatest significance in our waking and public life.92
92 The reader interested in pursuing the theme of phantasia in Aristotle might wish to
   consult the studies already mentioned, as well as the following: J. Frohschammer,
   Ueber die Principien der Aristotelischen Philosophic and die Bedeutung der Phantasie
   in Derselben {Munchen: Adolf Ackermann, 1881); Robert J. Roth, S.J., “The Aristote¬
   lian Use of Phantasia and Phantasma” , The New Scholasticism 37 (1963), 312-326;
   K. Lycos, “Aristotle and Plato on ‘Appearing’”, Mind 73 (1964), 496-514; M.-D.
   Phillipe, O.P., "Phantasia in the Philosophy of Aristotle”, The Thomist 35(1971), 1-42;
   A. D. Rees, “Aristotle’s Treatment of Phantasia” , in John P. Anton and George L.
   Kustas, eds., Essays in Ancient Greek Philosophy (Albany, NY: State University of
    New York Press, 1971), 491-504; Seth Benardete, “Aristotle, De Anima 111.3-5”, The
   Review of Metaphysics 28 (1975), 611-622; Joyce Engmann, “Imagination and Truth in
   Aristotle”, Journal of the History of Philosophy 14(1976), 259-265; Malcolm Schofield,
   “Aristotle on the Imagination”, in Jonathan Barnes, Malcolm Schofield, and Richard
   Sorabji, eds., Articles on Aristotle: 4. Psychology and Aesthetics (London: Duck¬
   worth, 1979), 103-132; and Jean-Louis Labarriere, “Imagination humaine et imagina¬
   tion animale chez Aristote”, Phronesis 29 (1984), 17-49.
