Assessment of Student Engagement in Virtual Reality Clinical Immersion
Environments through Eye Tracking
Prof. Christine E King, University of California, Irvine
 Dr. Christine King is an Associate Teaching Professor of Biomedical Engineering at UC Irvine. She
 received her BS and MS from Manhattan College in Mechanical Engineering and her PhD in Biomedical
 Engineering from UC Irvine, where she developed brain-computer interface systems for neurorehabilitation. She was a post-doctorate in the Wireless Health Institute at the University of California, Los Angeles,
 and a research manager in the Center for SMART Health, where she focused on wireless health monitoring for stroke and pediatric asthma. Her current research is on engineering education and women’s health,
 specializing in pedagogy strategies to promote learning and innovation in design-build-test courses, including senior design, computer programming, and computer-aided-design courses, as well as pre-partum
 and partum medical devices.
Matthew Lo, University of California, Irvine
 Matthew Lo is a graduate student pursuing his Master of Engineering in Biomedical Engineering at UC
 Irvine. He completed his BS in Biomedical Engineering: Premedical from UC Irvine, during which he
 lead and participated in a wide range of research, including (1) refining virtual reality modalities to improve medical training, (2) analyzing the mechanisms of slip and maintaining balance, (3) characterizing
 neuronal endolysosomal vesicle stages in Alzheimer’s Disease, (4) developing a spectroscopy device to
 age bruises primarily for domestic abuse, (5) designing an angioplasty balloon catheter to increase the accuracy of stenting, and 6) creating a treatment device for paravalvular leak. Currently, Matthew continues
 most of his research from his undergraduate career, and is developing a contactless device for measuring
 vitals for his Master’s capstone. Although mainly focused on medical device research and development,
 as an aspiring physician-scientist, Matthew has a deep commitment to advancing medical education to ultimately improve both patient care and outcomes through his research to better understand physiological
 correlations with attention and to create novel and engaging virtual clinical experiences.
Milan Das, University of California, Irvine

 Milan Das is an undergraduate student pursuing his Bachelor of Science in Biomedical Engineering at
 UC Irvine, along with a Minor in Information and Computer Science. In his research work, Milan has
 developed extensive code to properly quantify electroencephalogram (EEG) and eye-tracking data underlying boredom and engagement in students for the identification of unmet clinical needs. With a passion
 for interdisciplinary innovation at the intersection of biomedical engineering and computer science, Milan
 has dedicated his undergraduate career to exploring new frontiers in medical technology. Spearheading
 projects in artificial intelligence for healthcare, Milan showcases his expertise in developing cutting-edge
 solutions to address public unmet needs. Currently, he is focused on prototyping a smart insole that utilizes
 machine learning to analyze gait and detect potential abnormalities that may require medical intervention.
Dalton Salvo, University of California, Irvine

 Dalton Salvo is a doctoral candidate in the Dept. of English at UC Irvine. He received his BA from the
 Univ. of San Diego, a MS in English Literature from the Univ. of Edinburgh, a MA in Rhetoric and
 Writing Studies from San Diego State Univ., and a MA in English literature from UC Irvine. His current
 research centers on identifying mental and emotional states generated through human interaction with
 virtual reality and other virtual artifacts by analyzing physiological data and applying that research to
 create more effective virtual learning environments. Leveraging this work, he is currently creating a persistent and interactive virtual environment for hosting remote learning classes in the Dept. of Biomedical
 Engineering at UC Irvine.

 Assessment of Student Engagement in Virtual Reality Clinical Immersion
 Environments through Eye Tracking

Introduction

Biomedical engineering stands at the forefront of addressing complex healthcare challenges
through continuous innovation. Cultivating adept biomedical engineers crucially involves
exposing them to clinical environments, enabling them to identify and address unmet needs [13]. Clinical immersions enable students to identify unmet needs by exposing them to diverse
healthcare training and delivery contexts. These experiences equip students to make wellinformed design decisions, extending beyond the classroom to the dynamic landscapes of
academia and industry [4]. The skill set cultivated through clinical immersion includes
proficiency in interdisciplinary communication, a nuanced understanding of the constraints that
designs must address, and the capability to identify user needs and interactions that can avoid
safety issues, recalls, and patient harm [3, 5]. The FDA has increasingly emphasized the
importance of clinical immersion to obtain firsthand feedback from physicians, nurses,
healthcare staff, and patients during ideation and initial design phases, as human factors in
medical devices is a requirement to ensure safety and efficacy [6]. However, the practical
integration of in-person clinical immersion for undergraduate students encounters substantial
hurdles, including restricted access to medical spaces and the escalating size of student cohorts.
This has led to a reduction in the number of clinical immersion programs and the number of
students able to participate in such [7-9].

In response to the above challenges, we have developed a novel virtual reality (VR) clinical
immersion platform, enabling a large number of students to access healthcare spaces [10, 11].
Designed for undergraduate biomedical engineering students, this innovative platform offers the
opportunity to explore and address unmet clinical needs within a simulated virtual environment.
To this end, the virtual reality platform allows students to visualize various medical procedures
in 360° and first-person view, enabling them to see both the full workflow of the environment
and the physician’s viewpoint. The VR platform has been integrated into a course on Unmet
Clinical Needs Finding, piloted during the Spring of 2022 and 2023 as an undergraduate elective
in biomedical engineering at the University of California Irvine. Students were instructed in the
principles of identifying unmet clinical needs and subsequently applied the platform for needs
finding, culminating in the development of a proposed design plan by the end of the course [10].
Throughout the course, students received instruction in a diverse range of topics encompassing
team formation, human-centered engineering, regulatory controls, intellectual property
considerations, and global, cultural, social, environmental, and economic design factors. The
curriculum also covered unmet needs evaluation, go-to-market strategy, and commercialization
concepts, ensuring a comprehensive understanding of the multifaceted considerations inherent in
medical device innovation. After developing their design plan at the conclusion of the course,
students were encouraged to continue their proposed designs throughout their senior capstone
course the following year [12].

Pre- and post-survey information from prior studies utilizing VR platforms suggests that the VR
experiences greatly improved students’ feeling of immersion and presence, or being physically
present in the operating room, compared to traditional 2-dimensional video content [10]. To
further assess this from a physiological perspective, and to be able to determine whether students
were engaged within the VR environments, we conducted a study in which we collected
electroencephalogram (EEG), eye gaze, pupil dilation, heart rate, and heart rate variability from a
VR headset (HP Reverb G2 Omnicept VR Headset, HP Inc., Palo Alto, CA) [13]. These
preliminary results revealed that boredom and engagement are associated with changes in eye
gaze and EEG power spectral densities, particularly in the alpha band (8-12 Hz) over the parietal
lobe. The results also demonstrated that EEG can easily have excessive noise and artifacts, which
can lead to poor results. However, the signal to noise ratio of the eye tracking data was much
higher than the EEG data, demonstrating that the eye tracking data provided the most accurate
indication of whether participants were bored or engaged while watching the VR clinical
immersion video when compared to the other samples. These promising findings warrant further
investigation into using eye tracking to assess boredom and engagement within virtual
environments. Because eye tracking can be more easily implemented into online course
environments by leveraging the webcams commonly found in most laptops and tablets, it holds
tremendous potential for assessing student engagement and improving learning by detecting
boredom and then adapting the learning content to each participant’s learning pace.

Given the prior findings through the physiological assessment of engagement within the VR
clinical immersion platform, the overarching objectives of the current study are threefold. Firstly,
we aim to augment the innovation capacity of undergraduate biomedical engineering students by
providing them with virtual reality clinical immersion experiences. Secondly, this study seeks to
evaluate the degree of user engagement during these VR clinical immersion sessions through eye
tracking in a VR headset by first developing a gauge of when a student is bored versus engaged
from eye tracking software. Lastly, it focuses on the analysis of gaze behavior through the
integration of eye-tracking technology using webcams so that a more scalable approach to eye
tracking can be employed in online courses. The investigation into gaze behavior is undertaken
to reveal whether we can assess boredom versus engagement when a student is interacting with
learning content in a virtual environment, shedding light on the intricacies of sustaining focus
during clinical immersion. It aims to further discover and detail the most common eye gaze
patterns that manifest when bored or engaged, respectively. By elucidating these patterns
associated with both engagement and boredom, this study contributes not only to the
advancement of biomedical engineering education but also resonates with the broader paradigm
of virtual education solutions in response to contemporary educational demands.
Methodology

The study performed was approved under exemption approval (UCI IRB Exempt No. 20232678) to be able to assess the differences between engagement and boredom and the relative
engagement within a VR clinical immersion environment among student participants. We
examined a diverse participant pool primarily concentrated in the fields of Biomedical
Engineering and medical school education, ensuring a well-rounded and comprehensive group
for examination. Undergraduate Biomedical Engineers, Master of Engineering in Biomedical
Engineering students, and first- and second-year medical students enrolled at the University of
California Irvine were recruited and agreed to participate in the study. The students were asked
to first perform an eye-tracking calibration session, followed by watching engaging, clinical
immersion, and boring VR videos within the HP Reverb G2 Omnicept VR Headset. The eye
tracking sensors were first calibrated using a built-in simulator software [14] that requires the
participant to click a mouse to register the x and y coordinates of their gaze while attending to
locations on a circle at the center of the screen. The centroid of the circle (0, 0) is placed in the
direct middle of the screen, and the (x, y) coordinates are then calculated given the user input and
pixel coordinate convention.

After calibrating the HP Omnicept VR Headset eye tracking sensors, we then had student
participants watch our three video samples, presenting them in a specific order. Early
experiments revealed that the boring video increased levels of exhaustion, negatively impacting
participants' subsequent experiences with the other videos. Accordingly, participants watched
our sample videos in the following order: (1) interesting, (2) clinical immersion, and (3) boring.
Given the subjective nature of boredom and engagement and the study’s focus on assessing such
phenomena, control samples were deliberately chosen to be either boring or interesting for the
broadest participant appeal. As such, we assigned our interesting sample to be a conspiracy
theory video on alien reproduction vehicles and alternative energy sources, given the increased
public interest in aliens and unknown aerial phenomena in recent years [15]. Our clinical
immersion experience was a clip from a spinal deformation procedure in a standard operating
room [10]. Lastly, our boring sample was extracted from a 1989 Microsoft Word tutorial,
assuming that most students would already be familiar with the information, and the outdated
content would enhance the likelihood of generating a strong sense of boredom in our participants
[16]. In our pilot study, which utilized EEG and various physiological sensing technologies [11],
both our interesting and boring video samples were observed to evoke distinct states of both
boredom and engagement as determined by self-reported survey data.

To assess the eye tracking features associated with engagement and boredom, the eye tracking
data and synchronized videos were reviewed to qualitatively determine whether any patterns or
variations in visual focus were observed as different across our three video samples. To this end,
the pupil dilation and gaze location for each eye (X/Y coordinates) were measured in real time at
a sampling rate of 120 Hz [13]. The data was then synchronized with the videos using the opensource application programming interfaces (APIs) and developer platform provided by HP [13],
Adobe Premiere Pro (Adobe Systems, San Jose, CA) [18], and Matlab for assessment of which
eye tracking features correlated with boredom and engagement. Fig. 1 shows how the eye
tracking and heart rate data were collected and synchronized with the video data for subsequent
analyses. Since our prior research found that the heart rate and heart rate variability data did not
provide any conclusive results [11], these data were subsequently removed from analysis. Using
the eye tracking data collected, specific features that were further assessed included X and Y
pupil location, pupil dilation, eye movement deviation from a neutral resting position (i.e. eye
movement from the center to the periphery), and the variance of the eye gaze deviation from the
center. The eye gaze deviation from the center was calculated as a 5-point sliding window
median filter distance from the center in the X and Y directions using the Euclidean distance
formula, respectively, for each pupil, where the center location of the screen is (0, 0).

Quantitative analysis was performed to determine whether there were any statistical differences
between the boring, engagement, and clinical immersion videos via the above eye gaze
parameters. A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) test was performed to compare the means
of the three videos, as these were independent samples with normal distributions. The pupil
dilation, median eye gaze deviation from the center of the screen, and the variance of eye gaze
deviation from the center were analyzed for statistical significance at an alpha level of 0.05.

In addition to the deeper assessment of the eye tracking features associated with the detection of
engagement and boredom within the HP Omnicept VR Headset, the accuracy of webcam-based
eye tracking was performed to see if a more scalable approach could be utilized to assess
boredom within 2D virtual environments using laptops. Since virtual environments are more
accessible for use and more scalable if available through laptops over VR Headsets in Massive
Open Online Courses (MOOCs) and at other institutions, personal laptop webcams were
assessed in terms of eye gaze location accuracy to see if they can accurately detect gaze
deviation from center and eye gaze deviation values for future use in real-time interventions
within the virtual environments to increase engagement and learning. To this end, participants
were asked to follow several short videos in which they were asked to follow a target (e.g. the
red ball shown in Fig. 2) while their eye tracking data was recorded. This data was then
synchronized with the videos using MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, MA) software, and crosscorrelation analysis was performed to assess the accuracy and time lag between the sensor data
and known eye position.

Webcam eye tracking data collection involved
creating windows around the face and then
each eye for each frame. The algorithm first
determined whether a webcam frame was
detected, followed by assessing whether a face
was present within the frame. Once a face was
detected, it was framed, and the eyes within
this frame were identified. The eye center
location in the X and Y position were then
found within each eye region frame. This
process was then repeated for each webcam
frame detected, subsequently saved as a CSV
file. UTC timestamping was utilized to assist
with the synchronization of dot location data in
the videos for subsequent cross-correlation analysis.

Results

The eye gaze features collected via headset revealed a qualitative difference in pupil dilation and
variance of eye gaze deviation from the center of the screen (Fig. 3). Specifically, among the 12
participants, we observed that six experienced greater pupil dilation when viewing the engaging
video compared to the boring video. Additionally, the variance calculated for the median eye
gaze distance from the center of the screen exhibited a lower value during the engaging video
compared to the boring video in 8 out of the 12 participants.
We implemented a one-way ANOVA test to assess the statistical significance between the video
types for each of these features. The evaluation suggests a statistically significant difference in
the eye gaze distance from the center variance when comparing the clinical and boring videos (p
= 0.0004, Fig. 4). All other p-values comparing each feature by video type were inconclusive (p
> 0.05).

Four students participated in the
webcam eye tracking portion of the
study using their own laptop webcams.
The cross-correlation analysis of the
webcam eye tracking for the four tested
participants revealed an average crosscorrelation of 0.874 at an average lag of
0.03 s (Fig. 5). To further assess
relative accuracy of the webcam eye
tracking, average correlation values
were calculated across the four subjects
under different conditions. This
included different distances from the
screen (1 ft, 2 ft, and 3 ft), the presence
or absence of eyeglasses, and in both
well-lit and dark room environments
(Fig. 6). The correlation values ranged
from 0.80 to 0.91, where many
participants had lower correlation values in a dark room, though this was not statistically
significant.

Discussion

Qualitative analysis revealed that the most important features for the assessment of boredom and
engagement in a VR environment are pupil dilation and the calculated variance of the eye gaze
deviation from the center of the screen. However, it must be noted that there are numerous
variables that can influence pupil dilation, perhaps most strongly being the intensity or brightness
of light. Given such variables and the relatively small number of samples in our data set, we can
only offer a speculative interpretation until further data is collected and analyzed. These values
showed that engaging videos have a relatively higher pupil dilation than boring videos. The
boring videos had a higher variance when calculating the deviation from the center of the screen,
and the clinical video was statistically different from the boring video data using this feature,
more closely resembling the engaging video data. The qualitative analyses also demonstrated
that the clinical immersion video is oftentimes in between the boring and engaging data, which is
corroborated by the self-reports of perceived boredom by the participants who generally scored it
as being more boring than the engaging sample but less than the boring sample. Lastly, we
hypothesized that the eye gaze patterns associated with boredom could be represented as high
arousal or low arousal. When the bored participant exhibited a high arousal state, the participant
tended to look around the screen trying to find something to attend to in order to increase their
engagement. This would result in a greater variance associated with the distance from center eye
gaze values in the left and right eye. Low arousal boredom, or the observation that a participant
tends to experience lower gaze variance (colloquially referred to as a “zombie stare”), was
observed in only two participants: Subject 1 and 2.

The results of the comparison across the engaging, clinical, and boring videos demonstrated that
eye gaze patterns can be utilized to measure engagement within a VR environment. The use of
pupil dilation and the variance of eye gaze from the center of the screen can be used to determine
whether students are engaged with the virtual learning content by assessing the intensity of their
felt boredom. This opens the possibility to create learning content that can algorithmically adapt
to each individual user’s learning pace. For example, student response system questions (e.g.
Clickers, online discussion boards, social media posts) or real-time sentiment feedback systems
[19] can be triggered using this approach. Further research will implement these techniques and
utilize machine learning methods such as Fisher’s Linear Discriminant Analysis (Fisher’s LDA)
or other forms of discriminant analysis [20] to find which combinations of these features best
model the difference between boredom and engagement.

The webcam-based eye tracking results show that there is a relatively high accuracy when
utilizing laptop webcams to assess eye gaze behavior. However, few limitations were found. For
example, the distance a person is from their webcam and the environment’s lighting conditions
can significantly affect the algorithm’s ability to identify and track eye location. This is
problematic in MOOCs, as students can participate in the VR clinical environment in different
conditions. This may lead to misclassification of boredom if real-time learning interventions are
triggered using eye gaze behaviors and should be measured in future studies to prevent student
frustration.

Conclusion

This research proposes practical strategies to enhance educational experiences in academic
settings by further physiologically analyzing the mental and emotional states of boredom and
engagement and how such data can be leveraged in the creation of educational content. Firstly,
further establishing the most common eye movement and pupil dilation patterns associated with
boredom and engagement. Secondly, using that data, develop webcam-based eye tracking
triggers to create adaptive virtual learning content to enhance overall student engagement and
learning experience. Lastly, integrate such triggers into our immersive environments to
individualize the learning experience in real time. In particular, immersive multi-user virtual
environments complete with voice chat, screen sharing, and digital learning content hold
tremendous pedagogical potential. We believe that, when coupled with the ability to not only
assess the effectiveness of our learning content and environments but also adapt itself to the
students’ attention span in real time by tracking boredom and engagement, eye tracking triggered
learning interventions will allow us to create pedagogical content that more effectively enhances
our students educational experience.
