Work in Progress: Physiological Assessment of Learning in a Virtual
Reality Clinical Immersion Environment
Prof. Christine E. King, University of California, Irvine
 Dr. Christine King is an Assistant Teaching Professor of Biomedical Engineering at UC Irvine. She received her BS and MS from Manhattan College in Mechanical Engineering and her PhD in Biomedical
 Engineering from UC Irvine, where she developed brain-computer interface systems for neurorehabilitation. She was a post-doctorate in the Wireless Health Institute at the University of California, Los Angeles,
 and a research manager in the Center for SMART Health, where she focused on wireless health monitoring for stroke and pediatric asthma. Her current research is on engineering education and women’s health,
 specializing in pedagogy strategies to promote learning and innovation in design-build-test courses, including senior design, computer programming, and computer-aided-design courses, as well as pre-partum
 and partum medical devices.
Kit Roy Feeney
Quangminh Tang
Milan Das
Dalton Salvo

Introduction:

The National Academy of Engineering has identified personalized learning as one of the 14 Grand
Challenges for engineering in the 21st century [1]. Education is now shifting to a personalized process in
which student learning is tailored to the individual needs and abilities. In addition, the Creating Helpful
Incentives to Produce Semiconductors (CHIPS) and Science Act have listed experiential training as a
strategic objective [2] for US educational institutions. In biomedical engineering (BME) programs, this
includes the need for clinical immersion experiences, or learning from synergistic transactions between
people and the environment [3] within a healthcare setting.

Clinical immersion programs have been widely used in BME and bioengineering curricula [4], as it
allows students to observe the clinical environment, better understand the practical application of medical
devices, and identify unmet clinical needs in healthcare. However, due to the lack of access to nearby
medical centers, hospital access for non-essential personnel, and increasing class sizes, availability of
such programs are limited. As a result, these programs have typically been offered only to a select number
of students (e.g. 15-20 students) [5-7]. To resolve this lack of access and move beyond prior research that
utilized traditional video recordings [9-10], the Dept. of BME at the University of California Irvine (UCI)
developed a virtual reality (VR) clinical immersion platform for student learning of clinical procedures
and identification of unmet clinical needs [8]. The UCI VR platform enables a more comprehensive
presentation of the full spectrum of staff and equipment involved in a clinical procedure [11-12]. The
platform was piloted in Spring of 2022 as part of a junior-level unmet needs finding course for
undergraduate BME students [8]. Initial assessment of this program revealed that the VR clinical
immersion experiences greatly amplified the students' phenomenological sensations of immersion and
presence [8]. In this work, we further examine the phenomenological framework of educational VR
platforms [13-15] by focusing on the felt sensations of boredom and psychological engagement while
virtually immersed in clinical procedures.

Methods:

We adopted the boredom definition of Fahlman et al. as “the aversive experience of having an unfulfilled
desire to be engaged in satisfying activity” due to their comprehensive list of how boredom manifests
itself in terms of the subjects’ arousal and cognitive apprehension [18]. Focusing on state boredom as the
felt response to a discrete and concrete external experience, we attempted to track the state the student is
in when they say “this lesson is boring” or “this video is boring.” Conversely, we also attempted to track
the state of psychological engagement or attention to allow us to better analyze the effectiveness of our
VR clinical immersion environments. Therefore, we implemented psychological and physiological
methods for data collection. For our psychological methods, we had participants self-report their state of
boredom and engagement using questionnaires intended to determine such through their felt responses
and perception of time. Our physiological methods included collecting participants' electroencephalogram
(EEG) data, heart rate, heart rate variability (HRV), and eye tracking.

Study Protocol:

Prior studies that quantify boredom from EEG [17] suggest that the default mode network (DMN) area of
the brain is consistently activated during boredom, which includes the medial prefrontal cortex, posterior
cingulate cortex, and inferior parietal lobe. Additionally, these studies indicate that EEG recorded over
these regions of the brain exhibit increases in power in the alpha (8-12 Hz) and theta (4-8 Hz) frequency
bands when compared to non-boredom physiological states. Therefore, our study examined the alpha and
theta bands of EEG over the frontal and parietal lobes of the brain while participants were immersed in
boring and exciting environments; we compared this data to EEG collected during the VR clinical
immersion environments to determine whether the VR videos elicited neurophysiological behaviors more
closely associated with boredom or engagement. Our study was approved as an IRB exempt protocol by
the University of UCI Institutional Review Board (UCI IRB exempt No. 2678).

To perform the above comparison, three individuals, two of whom had no prior experience watching
medical procedures or performing clinical immersion within a hospital setting (see Table 1 for
demographic data), participated in the study. For each experiment, participants watched videos wearing
an HP-Reverb G2 Omnicept VR headset over their EEG cap. We had the participants watch three videos:
a boring video, an interesting video, and a clip from our VR clinical immersion videos while their data
was recorded. Each video was 17 minutes long and participants were given roughly a 5-minute break in
between each video to allow them to restabilize.

State boredom often derives from information or environmental stimuli that is monotonous, redundant,
and/or meaningless [18]. Thus, for our boring control sample, we selected a 1989 Microsoft Word tutorial
[19]. Due to the general familiarity our demographic has with Microsoft Word along with the age and
obsolescence of the interface, we believe this video meets the criteria necessary to induce state boredom.
For our interesting control sample, we selected a video covering alien reproduction vehicles and the
mysterious deaths of scientists exploring alternative means of energy generation [20]. While this video
could be categorized as a “conspiracy theory,” the accuracy of the information delivered is not as crucial
to the experiment as much as presenting information that is highly interesting to the participants. Given
the recent rise in public interest of aliens and importance of energy generation, we surmised that the topic
generates higher levels of psychological engagement. Lastly, our VR clinical immersion video consisted
of a clip from a spinal deformation operation recorded by the UCI medical student team [21].

Data Acquisition:

Each subject was seated and an EEG cap (Compumedics USA, Charlotte, NC) with 19 sintered Ag-AgCl
electrodes, arranged according to the 10-20 International Standard, was used for EEG recording and worn
under the VR headset. Conductive gel was applied to a subset of four electrodes at the following
locations: F3, F4, P3, P4. These channels were selected because they corresponded to the frontal (F) and
parietal (P) lobes, areas of the cerebral cortex generally active during boredom [16]. The frontal and
parietal lobes are part of the DMN, a network of interacting regions that produce strong and slow
frequencies during the resting state [17]. The ground channel, located near FPz, was used as a common
average reference electrode. The signals were amplified (gain: 5000) and band-pass filtered (1-35 Hz)
using four single-channel EEG bioamplifiers (Biopac Systems, Goleta CA), and were digitized (sampling
rate: 200 Hz, resolution: 16 bits) by the MP160 data acquisition system (Biopac Systems). Data
acquisition was performed using Acqknowledge Software (Biopac Systems). Resulting EEG data was
imported into MATLAB (Mathworks, Natick, MA) for signal processing and analysis. We used the
sensors built into the VR headset to collect heart rate, HRV, and eye tracking data (for information on the
specific sensors: https://developers.hp.com/omnicept/docs/fundamentals).

Data Analysis:

To preprocess the EEG data, the first and last 120-seconds of data was removed from analysis to remove
potential behavioral transition states. The raw EEG voltages were then plotted over time visually inspect
the data for noise or recording errors. The Fourier transform was then applied to calculate the power
spectral density (PSD) estimate using Welch’s method for spectral density estimation [22]. Welch’s PSD
estimate was computed in two point overlapping windows and the periodogram was calculated using the
discrete Fourier transform (DFT). To compare the PSD levels in the delta (1-3 Hz), theta (4-8 Hz), alpha
(8-12 Hz), and beta (13-30 Hz) frequency bands for each video and participant, the power-frequency plots
were limited from 1-30 Hz. To affirm normal data distribution for parametric statistical analysis, the team
conducted a Kolmogorov-Smirnov goodness-of-fit hypothesis test. If no normal distribution was found,
the Kruskal-Wallis one-way ANOVA with a 1% significance level was performed to compare PSD among
EEG channels between each video type, a non-parametric method to assess if more than two independent
samples have the same median. To analyze the other physiological data, we used MATLAB to plot the
heart rate, HRV, and XY gaze coordinates and then overlayed the gaze plot onto the subject’s video
recording in Adobe Premiere Pro (Adobe, San Jose, CA).
Results:
The power spectrum analyses of the EEG revealed that the PSD in the alpha band (8-12 Hz) changed over
EEG channels P3 and P4, the parietal lobe, for all videos for subject 1(see appendix Fig. 1). However, the
PSD over this band changed over the frontal lobe, channels F3 and F4, for the boring and clinical
immersion videos, but did not change significantly for the exciting video (see appendix Fig. 2-4). This is
consistent with prior EEG studies [17] and showed that the clinical video power spectrum more closely
resembled the boring video than the exciting video for Subject 1. No change in PSD was observed over
all EEG channels in the theta (4-8 Hz) frequency bands across the videos. Lastly, the eye tracking data
(example shown here: https://youtu.be/m4T8kIQqQqo) showed that participants were engaged throughout
the clinical immersion videos, and gazed mainly at the first person view at the medical devices, and
utilized the 360 view to see technicians and supporting physicians. Analysis of heart rate and HRV were
too similar in range across all videos, and HRV had too low of a sampling rate to discern any correlations
within or across the videos (example Fig. 7-8)
For the boredom control video psychological questionnaire (See appendix Table 3), all participants noted
high levels of boredom with an average of 9 out of 9 and started to feel bored in less than ⅓ of the total
video length. One participant fell asleep, and the others noted high levels of drowsiness after watching the
video. Additionally, all participants felt that the video was longer than in actuality by a reasonable
margin. For the interesting control video (see appendix Table 4), participants noted higher levels of
engagement with an average of 6, and all participants noted beginning to feel bored at around the 10minute mark. No participants fell asleep, but all did note a slight increase in drowsiness. One participant
felt the video was longer than in actuality, while the other two felt it was shorter than in actuality. The
clinical immersion video (see appendix Table 5) elicited an average level of engagement at 6.33, with two
of the participants beginning to feel bored at around 10 minutes. No participant fell asleep, one felt a
drowsiness level of 7 out of 9 while the other two did not experience any drowsiness from watching the
video. Interestingly, all participants felt that the video was longer than in actuality.
Discussion:
Due to issues during data acquisition, the EEG statistical analysis was inconclusive despite observing
statistical difference in subjects 2 and 3 (see appendix Table 1). Namely, Subject 2’s boredom and clinical
trials had noisy EEG data due to excessive artifacts (see appendix Fig. 5 and Fig. 6). Subject 3 had too
high impedances to detect EEG over channel F3 and F4, so although significant p-values were found for
these subjects, they are likely due to errors (see appendix Table 2). Despite the errors in our data,
preliminary results suggest that we can accurately track state boredom physiologically, as seen by the
changes in alpha band PSD. To resolve these issues, future work will include conducting preliminary tests
to guarantee data accuracy, checks during experimentation to assess for EEG artifacts such as motion and
line noise, and removing EEG channels due to excessive noise or high impedance. Additionally, it proved
to be extremely challenging synchronizing the EEG, eye tracking, and video recordings as they operate
independently from one another. Moving forward we will be redesigning our data collection platform so
that they are more accurately synchronized for higher quality data in our continuing experimentation.
 References:

[1] National Academy of Engineering. Grand Challenges for Engineering.
 http://www.engineeringchallenges.org/challenges/learning.aspx. Accessed: 2020-10-22.

[2] White House Office of Science and Technology Policy. Draft national strategy on microelectronics
 research. https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/09/SML-DRAFT-MicrolectronicsStrategy-For-Public-Comment.pdf. Accessed: 2022-10-22.

[3] A. Y. Kolb and D. A. Kolb. Experiential learning theory: A dynamic, holistic approach to management
 learning, education and development. The SAGE handbook of management learning, education and
 development, 42:68, 2009.

[4] Kotche, Miiri, Anthony E. Felder, Kimberlee Wilkens, and Susan Stirling. "Perspectives on
 bioengineering clinical immersion: history, innovation, and impact." Annals of biomedical engineering 48
 (2020): 2301-2309.

[5] J. Stephens, S. Rooney, E. Arch, and J. Higginson, “Bridging Courses: Unmet Clinical Needs to Capstone
 New Orleans, Louisiana. [Online]. Available: ASEE PEER, Doi: 10.18260/p.26393.

[6] J. Kadlowec, T. Merrill, S. Sood, J. Greene Ryan, A. Attaluri, and R. Hirsh, “Clinical Immersion and
 June 24-28, 2017, Columbus, Ohio. [Online]. Available: ASEE PEER, Doi: 10.18260/1-2—28040.

[7] W. H. Guilford, M. Keeley, B. P. Helmke, and T. E. Allen. "Work in Progress: A Clinical Immersion
 Tampa, Florida. [Online]. Available: ASEE PEER, Doi: 10.18260/1-2—33581.

[8] C. King, D. Salvo, J. Wang, S. Rao, R. Sreedasyam, A. Kulkarni, S. Braich, and I. Sharma. Work in
 progress: Development of virtual reality platform for unmet clinical needs finding in undergraduate

[9] V. Mittal, M. Thompson, S. M. Altman, P. Taylor, A. Summers, K. Goodwin, and A. Y. Louie, “Clinical
 Needs Finding: Developing the Virtual Experience—A Case Study,” Annals of Biomedical Engineering,
 vol. 41, pp. 1899–1912, March 2013.

[10] E. P. Brennan-Pierce, S. G. Stanton, and J. A. Dunn, “Clinical Immersion for Biomedical Engineers:
 Pivoting to a Virtual Format,” Biomedical Engineering Education, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 175–179, Jan. 2021.

[11] R. M. Tamim, R. M. Bernard, E. Borokhovski, P. C. Abrami, and R. F. Schmid, “What Forty Years of
 Research Says About the Impact of Technology on Learning,” Review of Educational Research, vol. 81,
 no. 1, pp. 4–28, March 2011.

[12] O. A. Meyer, M. K. Omdahl, and G. Makransky, “Investigating the Effect of Pre-training When Learning
 Through Immersive Virtual Reality and Video: A Media and Methods Experiment,” Computers &
 Education, vol. 140, no. 103603, Oct. 2019.

[13] J. F. Morie, “Ontological Implications of Being in Immersive Virtual Environments,” in SPIE
 Proceedings 6804, The Engineering Reality of Virtual Reality, Jan. 27-31, 2008, San Jose, California, no.
 680408, I. E. McDowall, M. Dolinsky, Eds. pp. 1–12, Feb. 8, 2008. [Online]. Available:

[14] A. Heinzel and T. Heinzel, “The Phenomenology of Virtual Reality and Phantom Sensations,” Studia
 Philosophia, 55:3, pp. 81–96, 2010.

[15] J. Tham, A. H. Duin, L. Gee, N. Ernst, B. Abdelqader, and M. McGrath, “Understanding Virtual Reality:
 Presence, Embodiment, and Professional Practice,” IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication,
 61:2, pp. 178–195, June 2018.

[16] Yelamanchili, Tejaswini. n.d. “Neural Correlates of Flow, Boredom, and Anxiety in Gaming: An
 Electroencephalogram Study,” 123.

[17] Raffaelli, Quentin, Caitlin Mills, and Kalina Christoff. 2018. “The Knowns and Unknowns of Boredom:
 A Review of the Literature.” Experimental Brain Research 236 (9): pp. 2451–62.

[18] Fahlman, Shelley A., Kimberley B. Mercer-Lynn, David B. Flora, and John D. Eastwood. “Development
 and Validation of the Multidimensional State Boredom Scale.” Assessment, 20:1, pp. 68-85, Feb., 2013.

[19] Whamtan. “THE MOST BORING VIDEO EVER MADE (Microsoft Word tutorial, 1989),” YouTube,
 Apr. 20, 2014.

[20] The Why Files. “How to Build a Working UFO | Alien Reproduction Vehicles (ARVs),” YouTube, Dec. 8,

[21] UCI Virtual Reality. “Spinal Deformation,” YouTube, Apr. 11, 2022.

[22] Parhi, Keshab K., and Manohar Ayinala 2013. "Low-complexity Welch power spectral density
 computation." IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers 61:1, pp. 172-182.
Appendix:

Subject Age Ethnicity Gender Past Experience
 Watching
 Medical
 Procedures?

1 20 Asian American Male No

2 21 Caucasian/Asian Male No
 American

3 33 Caucasian Male Yes

statistical difference between the clinical immersion video to the boring and exciting videos. A * denotes
 that the null hypothesis is rejected at a 1% significance level.

 Subject Channel F3 Channel F4 Channel P3 Channel P4

 Subject 1 0.4691 0.3364 0.1987 0.7039

 Subject 2 1.7408x10-8 * 3.4188x10-7 * 3.5425x10-7 * 4.8518x10-7 *

 Subject 3 1.36642x10-5 * 1.1184x10-5 * 0.3103 0.5905

Questions Subject 1 Subject 2 Subject 3

On a scale from 1-9 how bored were you while 9 9 9
watching this video? (1=Not bored at all, 9=
Extreme boredom)

On a scale from 1-9 how interested were you while 2 1 2
watching this video? (1=Not engaged at all,
9=Intense engagement)
Roughly how many minutes into the video until 3 minutes 30 seconds 4 minutes
you started to get bored?
Did you fall asleep/fight to stay awake? 8 9 (Fell asleep about 7
(1=Completely awake, 9=Fell asleep) halfway through the
 video)
Relatively speaking, how long did the video feel to 30 minutes 10 minutes 25 minutes
you? (excluding sleep)
On a scale from 1-9 how tired were you before 3 3 7
conducting the experiment (1=completely awake,
9=completely exhausted)

Questions Subject 1 Subject 2 Subject 3

On a scale from 1-9 how bored were you while watching this 5 4 3
video? (9 high) If so, when
On a scale from 1-9 how interested and engaged in the video 6 5 7
were you? (1=Not engaged at all, 9=Intense engagement)
Roughly how minutes into the video until you started to get 10 minutes 10 minutes 10 minutes
bored?
Did you fall asleep/fight to stay awake? (1=Completely awake, 6 3 3
9=Fell asleep).
Relatively speaking, roughly how long did the video feel to 20 minutes 10 minutes 15 minutes
you?
On a scale from 1-9 how tired were you before conducting the 5 4 6
experiment (1=completely awake, 9=completely exhausted)

Questions Subject 1 Subject 2 Subject 3

On a scale from 1-9 how bored were you while watching this 3 2 6
video? (9 high) If so, when
On a scale from 1-9 how interested and engaged in the video 8 8 3
were you? (1=Not engaged at all, 9=Intense engagement)
Roughly how minutes into the video until you started to get 10 minutes Did not get 10 minutes
bored? bored
Did you fall asleep/fight to stay awake? (1=Completely 1 1 7
awake, 9=Fell asleep).
Relatively speaking, roughly how long did the video feel to 25 minutes 20 minutes 23 minutes
you?
On a scale from 1-9 how tired were you before conducting 7 5 6
the experiment (1=completely awake, 9=completely
exhausted)
Assessment of Student Engagement in Virtual Reality Clinical Immersion
Environments through Eye Tracking
Prof. Christine E King, University of California, Irvine
 Dr. Christine King is an Associate Teaching Professor of Biomedical Engineering at UC Irvine. She
 received her BS and MS from Manhattan College in Mechanical Engineering and her PhD in Biomedical
 Engineering from UC Irvine, where she developed brain-computer interface systems for neurorehabilitation. She was a post-doctorate in the Wireless Health Institute at the University of California, Los Angeles,
 and a research manager in the Center for SMART Health, where she focused on wireless health monitoring for stroke and pediatric asthma. Her current research is on engineering education and women’s health,
 specializing in pedagogy strategies to promote learning and innovation in design-build-test courses, including senior design, computer programming, and computer-aided-design courses, as well as pre-partum
 and partum medical devices.
Matthew Lo, University of California, Irvine
 Matthew Lo is a graduate student pursuing his Master of Engineering in Biomedical Engineering at UC
 Irvine. He completed his BS in Biomedical Engineering: Premedical from UC Irvine, during which he
 lead and participated in a wide range of research, including (1) refining virtual reality modalities to improve medical training, (2) analyzing the mechanisms of slip and maintaining balance, (3) characterizing
 neuronal endolysosomal vesicle stages in Alzheimer’s Disease, (4) developing a spectroscopy device to
 age bruises primarily for domestic abuse, (5) designing an angioplasty balloon catheter to increase the accuracy of stenting, and 6) creating a treatment device for paravalvular leak. Currently, Matthew continues
 most of his research from his undergraduate career, and is developing a contactless device for measuring
 vitals for his Master’s capstone. Although mainly focused on medical device research and development,
 as an aspiring physician-scientist, Matthew has a deep commitment to advancing medical education to ultimately improve both patient care and outcomes through his research to better understand physiological
 correlations with attention and to create novel and engaging virtual clinical experiences.
Milan Das, University of California, Irvine

 Milan Das is an undergraduate student pursuing his Bachelor of Science in Biomedical Engineering at
 UC Irvine, along with a Minor in Information and Computer Science. In his research work, Milan has
 developed extensive code to properly quantify electroencephalogram (EEG) and eye-tracking data underlying boredom and engagement in students for the identification of unmet clinical needs. With a passion
 for interdisciplinary innovation at the intersection of biomedical engineering and computer science, Milan
 has dedicated his undergraduate career to exploring new frontiers in medical technology. Spearheading
 projects in artificial intelligence for healthcare, Milan showcases his expertise in developing cutting-edge
 solutions to address public unmet needs. Currently, he is focused on prototyping a smart insole that utilizes
 machine learning to analyze gait and detect potential abnormalities that may require medical intervention.
Dalton Salvo, University of California, Irvine

 Dalton Salvo is a doctoral candidate in the Dept. of English at UC Irvine. He received his BA from the
 Univ. of San Diego, a MS in English Literature from the Univ. of Edinburgh, a MA in Rhetoric and
 Writing Studies from San Diego State Univ., and a MA in English literature from UC Irvine. His current
 research centers on identifying mental and emotional states generated through human interaction with
 virtual reality and other virtual artifacts by analyzing physiological data and applying that research to
 create more effective virtual learning environments. Leveraging this work, he is currently creating a persistent and interactive virtual environment for hosting remote learning classes in the Dept. of Biomedical
 Engineering at UC Irvine.

 Assessment of Student Engagement in Virtual Reality Clinical Immersion
 Environments through Eye Tracking

Introduction

Biomedical engineering stands at the forefront of addressing complex healthcare challenges
through continuous innovation. Cultivating adept biomedical engineers crucially involves
exposing them to clinical environments, enabling them to identify and address unmet needs [13]. Clinical immersions enable students to identify unmet needs by exposing them to diverse
healthcare training and delivery contexts. These experiences equip students to make wellinformed design decisions, extending beyond the classroom to the dynamic landscapes of
academia and industry [4]. The skill set cultivated through clinical immersion includes
proficiency in interdisciplinary communication, a nuanced understanding of the constraints that
designs must address, and the capability to identify user needs and interactions that can avoid
safety issues, recalls, and patient harm [3, 5]. The FDA has increasingly emphasized the
importance of clinical immersion to obtain firsthand feedback from physicians, nurses,
healthcare staff, and patients during ideation and initial design phases, as human factors in
medical devices is a requirement to ensure safety and efficacy [6]. However, the practical
integration of in-person clinical immersion for undergraduate students encounters substantial
hurdles, including restricted access to medical spaces and the escalating size of student cohorts.
This has led to a reduction in the number of clinical immersion programs and the number of
students able to participate in such [7-9].

In response to the above challenges, we have developed a novel virtual reality (VR) clinical
immersion platform, enabling a large number of students to access healthcare spaces [10, 11].
Designed for undergraduate biomedical engineering students, this innovative platform offers the
opportunity to explore and address unmet clinical needs within a simulated virtual environment.
To this end, the virtual reality platform allows students to visualize various medical procedures
in 360° and first-person view, enabling them to see both the full workflow of the environment
and the physician’s viewpoint. The VR platform has been integrated into a course on Unmet
Clinical Needs Finding, piloted during the Spring of 2022 and 2023 as an undergraduate elective
in biomedical engineering at the University of California Irvine. Students were instructed in the
principles of identifying unmet clinical needs and subsequently applied the platform for needs
finding, culminating in the development of a proposed design plan by the end of the course [10].
Throughout the course, students received instruction in a diverse range of topics encompassing
team formation, human-centered engineering, regulatory controls, intellectual property
considerations, and global, cultural, social, environmental, and economic design factors. The
curriculum also covered unmet needs evaluation, go-to-market strategy, and commercialization
concepts, ensuring a comprehensive understanding of the multifaceted considerations inherent in
medical device innovation. After developing their design plan at the conclusion of the course,
students were encouraged to continue their proposed designs throughout their senior capstone
course the following year [12].

Pre- and post-survey information from prior studies utilizing VR platforms suggests that the VR
experiences greatly improved students’ feeling of immersion and presence, or being physically
present in the operating room, compared to traditional 2-dimensional video content [10]. To
further assess this from a physiological perspective, and to be able to determine whether students
were engaged within the VR environments, we conducted a study in which we collected
electroencephalogram (EEG), eye gaze, pupil dilation, heart rate, and heart rate variability from a
VR headset (HP Reverb G2 Omnicept VR Headset, HP Inc., Palo Alto, CA) [13]. These
preliminary results revealed that boredom and engagement are associated with changes in eye
gaze and EEG power spectral densities, particularly in the alpha band (8-12 Hz) over the parietal
lobe. The results also demonstrated that EEG can easily have excessive noise and artifacts, which
can lead to poor results. However, the signal to noise ratio of the eye tracking data was much
higher than the EEG data, demonstrating that the eye tracking data provided the most accurate
indication of whether participants were bored or engaged while watching the VR clinical
immersion video when compared to the other samples. These promising findings warrant further
investigation into using eye tracking to assess boredom and engagement within virtual
environments. Because eye tracking can be more easily implemented into online course
environments by leveraging the webcams commonly found in most laptops and tablets, it holds
tremendous potential for assessing student engagement and improving learning by detecting
boredom and then adapting the learning content to each participant’s learning pace.

Given the prior findings through the physiological assessment of engagement within the VR
clinical immersion platform, the overarching objectives of the current study are threefold. Firstly,
we aim to augment the innovation capacity of undergraduate biomedical engineering students by
providing them with virtual reality clinical immersion experiences. Secondly, this study seeks to
evaluate the degree of user engagement during these VR clinical immersion sessions through eye
tracking in a VR headset by first developing a gauge of when a student is bored versus engaged
from eye tracking software. Lastly, it focuses on the analysis of gaze behavior through the
integration of eye-tracking technology using webcams so that a more scalable approach to eye
tracking can be employed in online courses. The investigation into gaze behavior is undertaken
to reveal whether we can assess boredom versus engagement when a student is interacting with
learning content in a virtual environment, shedding light on the intricacies of sustaining focus
during clinical immersion. It aims to further discover and detail the most common eye gaze
patterns that manifest when bored or engaged, respectively. By elucidating these patterns
associated with both engagement and boredom, this study contributes not only to the
advancement of biomedical engineering education but also resonates with the broader paradigm
of virtual education solutions in response to contemporary educational demands.
Methodology

The study performed was approved under exemption approval (UCI IRB Exempt No. 20232678) to be able to assess the differences between engagement and boredom and the relative
engagement within a VR clinical immersion environment among student participants. We
examined a diverse participant pool primarily concentrated in the fields of Biomedical
Engineering and medical school education, ensuring a well-rounded and comprehensive group
for examination. Undergraduate Biomedical Engineers, Master of Engineering in Biomedical
Engineering students, and first- and second-year medical students enrolled at the University of
California Irvine were recruited and agreed to participate in the study. The students were asked
to first perform an eye-tracking calibration session, followed by watching engaging, clinical
immersion, and boring VR videos within the HP Reverb G2 Omnicept VR Headset. The eye
tracking sensors were first calibrated using a built-in simulator software [14] that requires the
participant to click a mouse to register the x and y coordinates of their gaze while attending to
locations on a circle at the center of the screen. The centroid of the circle (0, 0) is placed in the
direct middle of the screen, and the (x, y) coordinates are then calculated given the user input and
pixel coordinate convention.

After calibrating the HP Omnicept VR Headset eye tracking sensors, we then had student
participants watch our three video samples, presenting them in a specific order. Early
experiments revealed that the boring video increased levels of exhaustion, negatively impacting
participants' subsequent experiences with the other videos. Accordingly, participants watched
our sample videos in the following order: (1) interesting, (2) clinical immersion, and (3) boring.
Given the subjective nature of boredom and engagement and the study’s focus on assessing such
phenomena, control samples were deliberately chosen to be either boring or interesting for the
broadest participant appeal. As such, we assigned our interesting sample to be a conspiracy
theory video on alien reproduction vehicles and alternative energy sources, given the increased
public interest in aliens and unknown aerial phenomena in recent years [15]. Our clinical
immersion experience was a clip from a spinal deformation procedure in a standard operating
room [10]. Lastly, our boring sample was extracted from a 1989 Microsoft Word tutorial,
assuming that most students would already be familiar with the information, and the outdated
content would enhance the likelihood of generating a strong sense of boredom in our participants
[16]. In our pilot study, which utilized EEG and various physiological sensing technologies [11],
both our interesting and boring video samples were observed to evoke distinct states of both
boredom and engagement as determined by self-reported survey data.

To assess the eye tracking features associated with engagement and boredom, the eye tracking
data and synchronized videos were reviewed to qualitatively determine whether any patterns or
variations in visual focus were observed as different across our three video samples. To this end,
the pupil dilation and gaze location for each eye (X/Y coordinates) were measured in real time at
a sampling rate of 120 Hz [13]. The data was then synchronized with the videos using the opensource application programming interfaces (APIs) and developer platform provided by HP [13],
Adobe Premiere Pro (Adobe Systems, San Jose, CA) [18], and Matlab for assessment of which
eye tracking features correlated with boredom and engagement. Fig. 1 shows how the eye
tracking and heart rate data were collected and synchronized with the video data for subsequent
analyses. Since our prior research found that the heart rate and heart rate variability data did not
provide any conclusive results [11], these data were subsequently removed from analysis. Using
the eye tracking data collected, specific features that were further assessed included X and Y
pupil location, pupil dilation, eye movement deviation from a neutral resting position (i.e. eye
movement from the center to the periphery), and the variance of the eye gaze deviation from the
center. The eye gaze deviation from the center was calculated as a 5-point sliding window
median filter distance from the center in the X and Y directions using the Euclidean distance
formula, respectively, for each pupil, where the center location of the screen is (0, 0).

Quantitative analysis was performed to determine whether there were any statistical differences
between the boring, engagement, and clinical immersion videos via the above eye gaze
parameters. A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) test was performed to compare the means
of the three videos, as these were independent samples with normal distributions. The pupil
dilation, median eye gaze deviation from the center of the screen, and the variance of eye gaze
deviation from the center were analyzed for statistical significance at an alpha level of 0.05.

In addition to the deeper assessment of the eye tracking features associated with the detection of
engagement and boredom within the HP Omnicept VR Headset, the accuracy of webcam-based
eye tracking was performed to see if a more scalable approach could be utilized to assess
boredom within 2D virtual environments using laptops. Since virtual environments are more
accessible for use and more scalable if available through laptops over VR Headsets in Massive
Open Online Courses (MOOCs) and at other institutions, personal laptop webcams were
assessed in terms of eye gaze location accuracy to see if they can accurately detect gaze
deviation from center and eye gaze deviation values for future use in real-time interventions
within the virtual environments to increase engagement and learning. To this end, participants
were asked to follow several short videos in which they were asked to follow a target (e.g. the
red ball shown in Fig. 2) while their eye tracking data was recorded. This data was then
synchronized with the videos using MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, MA) software, and crosscorrelation analysis was performed to assess the accuracy and time lag between the sensor data
and known eye position.

Webcam eye tracking data collection involved
creating windows around the face and then
each eye for each frame. The algorithm first
determined whether a webcam frame was
detected, followed by assessing whether a face
was present within the frame. Once a face was
detected, it was framed, and the eyes within
this frame were identified. The eye center
location in the X and Y position were then
found within each eye region frame. This
process was then repeated for each webcam
frame detected, subsequently saved as a CSV
file. UTC timestamping was utilized to assist
with the synchronization of dot location data in
the videos for subsequent cross-correlation analysis.

Results

The eye gaze features collected via headset revealed a qualitative difference in pupil dilation and
variance of eye gaze deviation from the center of the screen (Fig. 3). Specifically, among the 12
participants, we observed that six experienced greater pupil dilation when viewing the engaging
video compared to the boring video. Additionally, the variance calculated for the median eye
gaze distance from the center of the screen exhibited a lower value during the engaging video
compared to the boring video in 8 out of the 12 participants.
We implemented a one-way ANOVA test to assess the statistical significance between the video
types for each of these features. The evaluation suggests a statistically significant difference in
the eye gaze distance from the center variance when comparing the clinical and boring videos (p
= 0.0004, Fig. 4). All other p-values comparing each feature by video type were inconclusive (p
> 0.05).

Four students participated in the
webcam eye tracking portion of the
study using their own laptop webcams.
The cross-correlation analysis of the
webcam eye tracking for the four tested
participants revealed an average crosscorrelation of 0.874 at an average lag of
0.03 s (Fig. 5). To further assess
relative accuracy of the webcam eye
tracking, average correlation values
were calculated across the four subjects
under different conditions. This
included different distances from the
screen (1 ft, 2 ft, and 3 ft), the presence
or absence of eyeglasses, and in both
well-lit and dark room environments
(Fig. 6). The correlation values ranged
from 0.80 to 0.91, where many
participants had lower correlation values in a dark room, though this was not statistically
significant.

Discussion

Qualitative analysis revealed that the most important features for the assessment of boredom and
engagement in a VR environment are pupil dilation and the calculated variance of the eye gaze
deviation from the center of the screen. However, it must be noted that there are numerous
variables that can influence pupil dilation, perhaps most strongly being the intensity or brightness
of light. Given such variables and the relatively small number of samples in our data set, we can
only offer a speculative interpretation until further data is collected and analyzed. These values
showed that engaging videos have a relatively higher pupil dilation than boring videos. The
boring videos had a higher variance when calculating the deviation from the center of the screen,
and the clinical video was statistically different from the boring video data using this feature,
more closely resembling the engaging video data. The qualitative analyses also demonstrated
that the clinical immersion video is oftentimes in between the boring and engaging data, which is
corroborated by the self-reports of perceived boredom by the participants who generally scored it
as being more boring than the engaging sample but less than the boring sample. Lastly, we
hypothesized that the eye gaze patterns associated with boredom could be represented as high
arousal or low arousal. When the bored participant exhibited a high arousal state, the participant
tended to look around the screen trying to find something to attend to in order to increase their
engagement. This would result in a greater variance associated with the distance from center eye
gaze values in the left and right eye. Low arousal boredom, or the observation that a participant
tends to experience lower gaze variance (colloquially referred to as a “zombie stare”), was
observed in only two participants: Subject 1 and 2.

The results of the comparison across the engaging, clinical, and boring videos demonstrated that
eye gaze patterns can be utilized to measure engagement within a VR environment. The use of
pupil dilation and the variance of eye gaze from the center of the screen can be used to determine
whether students are engaged with the virtual learning content by assessing the intensity of their
felt boredom. This opens the possibility to create learning content that can algorithmically adapt
to each individual user’s learning pace. For example, student response system questions (e.g.
Clickers, online discussion boards, social media posts) or real-time sentiment feedback systems
[19] can be triggered using this approach. Further research will implement these techniques and
utilize machine learning methods such as Fisher’s Linear Discriminant Analysis (Fisher’s LDA)
or other forms of discriminant analysis [20] to find which combinations of these features best
model the difference between boredom and engagement.

The webcam-based eye tracking results show that there is a relatively high accuracy when
utilizing laptop webcams to assess eye gaze behavior. However, few limitations were found. For
example, the distance a person is from their webcam and the environment’s lighting conditions
can significantly affect the algorithm’s ability to identify and track eye location. This is
problematic in MOOCs, as students can participate in the VR clinical environment in different
conditions. This may lead to misclassification of boredom if real-time learning interventions are
triggered using eye gaze behaviors and should be measured in future studies to prevent student
frustration.

Conclusion

This research proposes practical strategies to enhance educational experiences in academic
settings by further physiologically analyzing the mental and emotional states of boredom and
engagement and how such data can be leveraged in the creation of educational content. Firstly,
further establishing the most common eye movement and pupil dilation patterns associated with
boredom and engagement. Secondly, using that data, develop webcam-based eye tracking
triggers to create adaptive virtual learning content to enhance overall student engagement and
learning experience. Lastly, integrate such triggers into our immersive environments to
individualize the learning experience in real time. In particular, immersive multi-user virtual
environments complete with voice chat, screen sharing, and digital learning content hold
tremendous pedagogical potential. We believe that, when coupled with the ability to not only
assess the effectiveness of our learning content and environments but also adapt itself to the
students’ attention span in real time by tracking boredom and engagement, eye tracking triggered
learning interventions will allow us to create pedagogical content that more effectively enhances
our students educational experience.
Biomedical Engineering Education (2024) 4:381–397 BIOMEDICAL
 ENGINEERING

 INNOVATION ARTICLE

Phenomenological Evaluation of an Undergraduate Clinical Needs
Finding Skills Through a Virtual Reality Clinical Immersion Platform
Christine E. King1 · Dalton Salvo2

Received: 30 August 2023 / Accepted: 22 January 2024 / Published online: 5 March 2024

Abstract
Clinical immersion programs have been widely used in higher education, particularly in biomedical engineering (BME)
programs, to allow students to identify and evaluate the unmet clinical needs. However, due to limited space and extensive
safety protocols required to enter hospitals, access for undergraduate students to shadow physicians is limited. BME students
need to be trained to identify and evaluate unmet clinical needs through observation and experience to remain competitive in
the medical device landscape. To be able to allow students to immerse themselves into clinical environments remotely and
be able to visualize the full spectrum of healthcare workers and equipment that support a procedure beyond what is available through online video records, we have developed a virtual reality (VR) clinical immersion platform. The applicability
and overall student satisfaction of using VR learning environments was investigated through a pilot undergraduate BME
unmet clinical needs finding course in the spring of 2022. Pre- and post-course survey analyses revealed that the VR clinical
immersion experiences did greatly increase immersion within a medical procedure, and students felt sensations of presence
and embodiment. Given the results of this study, VR learning environments can provide a means for students to perform
unmet clinical needs through virtual clinical immersion. However, these technologies to support environments should be
readily accessible within the classroom.

Keywords Biomedical engineering education · Clinical immersion · Design ideation · Unmet clinical needs finding ·
Virtual reality

Introduction these programs continue to have substantially more applicants than can be served, programs such as those described
In the realm of biomedical engineering (BME) curricula, in Guilford et al. [4] and Moravec et al. [6] illustrate that an
the discovery of unmet clinical needs and the adoption of inequitable situation exists wherein a majority of students
clinical immersion programs have become more widespread will be unable to participate in any clinical immersion expe-
[1–3]. Regrettably, studies have found that only 48% of rience despite clear demand for such.
applicants to clinical immersion courses and 24% of appli- To allow BME students to fully engage with clinical
cants to immersion programs are able to participate annu- settings, they must cultivate an understanding of the daily
ally [4]. The current situation leaves a majority of students operations and necessities of the customers and consumers
unable to participate in any clinical immersion course or who will rely on their engineering solutions [7]. A lack of
program. Given increasing cohort sizes and numbers of insight into how medical professionals employ these tools in
BME undergraduate programs [5], this suggests an increase their routine for diagnosis and treatment puts our students at
in applicants to such clinical immersion experiences. As a disadvantage. Though not an inevitability, a pervasive lack
 of human-centered design knowledge and understanding of
* Christine E. King how such devices are used in practice has the potential to
 kingce@uci.edu hinder human-centered medical device innovation [8]. To
 stay ahead in the medical device domain, it’s imperative
 Department of Biomedical Engineering, University for BME undergraduates to be well-versed in spotting and
 of California Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA
 addressing unseen clinical needs via direct observation and
 Department of English, University of California Irvine, hands-on experiences [9]. Given the hurdles in accessibility
 Irvine, CA, USA

 Vol.:(0123456789)
382 C. E. King, D. Salvo

and the recent pivot toward remote instruction, some educa- A prior study that compared 2D videos to an immersive
tional bodies have turned to digital video sessions to achieve and physically interactive 3D simulation demonstrated that
some degree of clinical immersion experience [10, 11]. Yet, students had increased levels of engagement, more posithese video resources don’t equate to the depth of immersion tive attitudes toward the educational material, and the 3D
as in-person clinical environment exposure, neither do they environment had an overall greater pedagogical effectivepresent a comprehensive view of the myriad health profes- ness [29]. While this study was conducted using a Mixed
sionals and apparatus involved in surgical processes. Thus, Reality simulation, it is likely the same would be true of
the onus is on educators to integrate technological tools that a VR simulation given the underlying pedagogical prinnot only meet these academic aspirations but also amplify ciples remain the same. Consequently, in response to the
the students’ learning experience by focusing on enriching aforementioned educational needs, the authors are crafting
remote pedagogical materials and apparatuses. a VR-based clinical immersion curriculum for undergraduThe use of virtual reality (VR) technology has become ate BME students. This equips them to identify and evaluincreasingly popular in medical education and other educa- ate unaddressed clinical needs before embarking on their
tional settings within the last few years [12]. Such technolo- yearlong senior entrepreneurial capstone course, referred to
gies use computationally rendered virtual places or virtual- as the BioENGineering INnovation and Entrepreneurship
izations of physical locations that allow the user to dive into (BioENGINE) program [30].
these virtual worlds and experience them through a first- In this study, we investigate the practical application,
person perspective [13]. These virtual environments (VEs) potential pedagogical benefit, and overall student satisfacimmerse the user in a simulated reality through the use of tion of using VR learning environments to perform clinical
interactive devices such as Head Mounted Displays (HMDs), immersion for unmet clinical needs finding among BME
controllers, and data gloves. In the most common VR format undergraduate students prior to entering the BioENGINE
the user dons a HMD through which they stereoscopically program. By assessing our students’ responses as to the eduview a virtual or virtualized space and the HMD/controllers cational efficacy of VR learning environments and whether
track the user’s movement, allowing them to “physically" they generate a greater degree of felt presence, we hope to
navigate that virtual space and interact with any manipulable discover if VR clinical immersion experiences are a viable
objects that may be present. and more effective alternative to traditional 2D videos. In
 Early investigations indicate mixed outcomes from uti- the spring of 2022, the Biomedical Engineering Department
lizing VR in educational settings [14]. Yet, newer stud- at the University of California Irvine (UCI) introduced a
ies contrasting VR with traditional video-based instruc- unique clinical needs program available to all engineering
tion reveal that VR learners display superior outcomes in departments. Drawing from insights provided by nursing
terms of knowledge transfer and self-efficacy compared to and allied health experts, our material was designed to be
their video-learning counterparts [15, 16]. This enhanced universally accessible from any device, be it a phone, tablet,
outcome can be attributed to VR’s capability to foster a computer, or VR headset. With a blended online curricuheightened state of presence [17, 18]. By facilitating physi- lum, encompassing VR immersive settings, video content,
cal locomotion and interaction within the virtual space, physician dialogues, educational modules, and collaboraVR technology aids in honing both hands-on procedural tive classroom activities, we catered the learning modules
and declarative knowledge [19, 20]. The heightened sense to around 150 students given our current undergraduate proof agency emerging from immersive VR interactions [21] gram size. To assess and improve these learning modules
has been linked to improving both memory and knowledge prior to making the course a required course in the underretention [22]. This amplified experiential sensation or graduate BME curriculum, it was piloted among 22 students
embodiment correlates with an increase in the total con- as an elective course. Our mission is to instruct students on
tent retained by students [23]. Such profound involvement identifying and evaluating unmet clinical needs that have
within a dynamic virtual realm, where users hold a degree the potential for commercialization, hone their teamwork
of autonomy, intensifies immersion and, therefore, presence. competencies, and harness existing clinical and behavioral
This enhanced sense of agency and presence can increase research instruments to enhance healthcare [31]. Effective
students’ understanding of the content as well as introduce clinical needs finding skills go beyond information retention
and prepare them for various career paths in future [24]. and require the development of a critical awareness that can
 Such student-centric pedagogical approaches encourage evaluate potential problems and create a solution to those
active learning by generating a greater felt sense of embodi- problems. Given this, it must be noted that the aforemenment and agency through an integration of digital technolo- tioned research results do not provide direct support that VR
gies and can increase levels of student engagement [25–28]. learning environments will be more effective in developing
Phenomenological Evaluation of an Undergraduate Clinical Needs Finding Skills Through a Virtual… 383

students' clinical needs finding skills versus 2D videos. It rooms. Given the limitations of the game design software
is unlikely that VR clinical immersion programs will be as used, we were unable to house multiple videos within the
pedagogically effective as in-person observation. However, same space. To resolve this issue, each room serves as a
we hypothesize that the first-person perspective allowed by launching point that will transfer the user to a new environVR, and the enhanced sense of presence and agency it gen- ment wherein they can review the learning materials located
erates, has the potential to be more beneficial to students’ in that room.
development of such skills than 2D videos as it more closely Given our goal to maintain the highest level of accessimulates the experience of being physically present in the sibility, we created both a 2D traditional video version and
operating room. That said, and as we will discuss in greater 3D VR version of each experience deployed across a range
length in our Discussions section, we were unable to objec- of platforms and devices using the same footage described
tively evaluate the pedagogical effectiveness of each ver- above. Our 2D experiences consisting of the operating room
sion on equal grounds; rather, we focused on discovering footage with the physician’s POV overlaid, and the physiour students’ opinions on both the 2D and 3D VR versions cian and engineer interviews were uploaded to our YouTube
derived from their subjective experiences with the content. channel (https://w
 ​ ww.y​ outub​ e.c​ om/c​ hanne​ l/U
 ​ CAwi0​ hckut​ h-​
 OGOAO​IB8YEg) so that anyone with a digital device and
 internet connection can view them. We also created a 2D PC
Methods version using the Unreal Engine game development software
 (Unreal Engine, Cary, NC), which allowed us to embed all
Preparation Before the Experimental VR Course of our content within a single interactive and explorable virtual space similar to contemporary PC video games. For our
Prior to our experimental course, we recorded our medi- 3D VR versions, we uploaded the operating room footage
cal footage and constructed our virtual infrastructure. We to YouTube so they could be viewed using a Google Cardfilmed various medical procedures, but chose five opera- board VR headset (Google, Mountain View, CA) or Meta
tions in specific to evaluate our course and VR environ- Quest 2 VR headsets (Meta, Menlo Park CA), which could
ments: Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS), Transcatheter Aortic be checked out from our library [32]. Additionally, we develValve Replacement (TAVR), Spinal Deformation Surgery, oped an immersive and interactive version using the Unreal
Cataract Surgery, and a Corneal Transplant operation. These Engine specifically for the Meta Quest 2 headsets, allowing
procedures were filmed using a 180-degree stereoscopic us to include all the relevant materials for a specific operacamera to capture the entirety of the operating room as well tion within a single virtual environment. For both the 2D
as recording footage from the primary physician’s point of PC and interactive VR experiences, we created one version
view (POV) through a head mounted camera worn during that relied on streaming videos from our AWS servers for
the operation. The filming of these procedures was approved the highest quality content, but also a downloadable version
as exempt under UCI Institutional Review Board (IRB) (IRB for those who do not have the necessary bandwidth to stream
Exempt No. 15531 for UCI Medical Center filming and 1184 high-quality video content. By developing various versions
for UCI School of Medicine and School of Nursing filming of each experience and deploying our content across differlocations), and all physicians, patients, and staff provided ent platforms and devices, we ensured that any student with
informed consent prior to filming. Additionally, we inter- a smartphone, tablet, computer, or VR headset with internet
viewed the primary acting physicians of each procedure as access could view our educational content.
well as some engineers and entrepreneurs involved in the Our participants consisted of undergraduate BME studevelopment of the medical devices used to provide sup- dents enrolled in a pilot elective course, BME 179: Bioplemental learning materials. Once collected, the videos of medical Engineering Design: Addressing Unmet Clinical
the respective procedure and all the supplementary materi- Needs. This class is an upper division elective BME course
als were included in the VR experience for that procedure. consisting primarily of juniors and seniors with the occaFor example, in the TAVR environment, we included inter- sional freshman and sophomore. This course is designed
views from cardiologist Dr. Pranav Patel, engineer and VP to introduce undergraduates to the non-technical aspects of
of R&D at Edwards Lifesciences Sean Chow, an animation medical device development by performing unmet clinical
of a TAVR procedure, an overview of Edwards Lifesci- needs identification and evaluation. The goal is to use the
ence’s SAPIEN XT Transcathether valve that is used in this virtual experiences to help our undergraduates develop their
procedure, and the video footage of the operation itself. As clinical needs finding and screening skills by exposing them
described in “Unmet Clinical Needs Evaluation” section, to actual medical procedures, and using these procedures
we built a rudimentary hospital environment with various
384 C. E. King, D. Salvo

to evaluate identified needs for potential commercialization 1. Identify medical, technical, and market needs in formuand further development in their senior capstone program. lating biomedical engineering solutions to unmet clinical needs (EAC 7).
Stages of the Experimental VR Course 2. Employ the various steps in bringing a biomedical product from ideation to invention (EAC 2).
At the start of the course, we explained the nature of the 3. Identify the realistic constraints of a medical innovation
experiment to the students and then asked them to fill out an product, with consideration of public health, safety and
optional survey to establish demographics, and their usage welfare, as well as global, cultural, social, environmenof both VR and traditional video games prior to them start- tal, and economic factors (EAC 2).
ing the class. All students were provided with an Informa- 4. Articulate the impacts of the project in a global, ecotion Study Sheet made available on the course website (UCI nomic, environmental, and societal context (EAC 4).
IRB Exempt No. 904). Additionally, this first survey also 5. Communicate unmet clinical needs, concept generation,
asked students how they think VR could be either beneficial and concept screening of medical innovation and invenor an impedance to developing clinical needs finding skills tions to a wide range of audiences (EAC 3).
and gauge their overall interest in using VR for educational
purposes (to view Survey 1’s Questions, see Appendix B.1). It can be noted that each course learning objective described
 During the course, the students watched guided video above meets ABET’s Engineering Accreditation Commisinterviews from physicians and online virtual reality immer- sion (EAC) student learning outcomes for BME programs.
sive surgeries and procedures that displayed how physi- In particular, course learning objective 1 meets EAC 7: “an
cians and support staff conduct themselves during such ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using
procedures. They then identified potential unmet clinical appropriate learning strategies,” while learning outcomes 2
needs and issues that engineering principles of design can and 3 meet EAC 2: “an ability to apply engineering design
be applied to. Prior to this, they formed teams based upon to produce solutions that meet specified needs with contheir interests and active learning modules within the class- sideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as
room that enhanced team cohesion and effective teamwork global, cultural, social, environmental, and economic fac-
[33]. The students then performed gap analyses as well as tors.” Course learning outcome 4 meets EAC 4: “an abilvirtually interviewed potential customers, strategic partners, ity to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities
and stakeholders in the value chain using online surveys in engineering situations and make informed judgments,
to evaluate whether there was any potential commercializa- which must consider the impact of engineering solutions
tion for their proposed solution. In addition, to gain further in global, economic, environmental, and societal contexts,”
insight from stakeholders, students were able to interview while course learning outcome 5 meets EAC 3: “an ability
healthcare professionals through zoom interviews with phy- to communicate effectively with a range of audiences” [35].
sicians and staff from UCI Medical Center and Children’s
Hospital of Orange County that have ongoing collaborations Technical Skills Development Through Reverse Engineering
with the course instructor (to view a sample of one team’s
interview questions and answers, see Appendix C). They To understand how medical devices are designed, the secalso performed online surveys with patients through patient ond two weeks of the course focused on reverse engineering
advocacy groups. By the end of the quarter, the students medical devices by the student teams to understand how
drafted a strategic plan to develop their product throughout devices work and are designed. This consisted of identifythe BioENGINE program [30]. The following sections high- ing an existing medical device in their team’s medical field
light how the course provides hands-on learning, VR clinical of interest. Subsequently, they were tasked with grasping
immersion experiences, business model canvas development and elaborating on: 1) the context in which the device is
for students to be able to identify and evaluate an unmet employed (such as its application location, the target user,
need, and how to create a viable design plan for their senior frequency of use, and duration), 2) its comprehensive
capstone course [34], which they perform the following year functionality (e.g., dismantling and reassembling it), 3)
in a 9-month mentored entrepreneurial design program [30]. intentional design choices (like choice of materials, safety
These learning modules are conducted to achieve the follow- features, electrical needs, and software specifications), 4)
ing major course learning outcomes: potential points of breakdown through a failure mode effects
 analysis, 5) user-friendliness (including aspects like comfort,
 recyclability, simplicity of implementation, and operation
Phenomenological Evaluation of an Undergraduate Clinical Needs Finding Skills Through a Virtual… 385

 Virtual Unmet Clinical Needs Identification

 After the reverse engineering exercises were performed, students used immersive virtual reality software that is compatible with all phones, computers, and virtual reality headsets,
 and google cardboard and Meta Quest 2 headsets (Fig. 2)
 were provided to them as part of their course materials and
 were available for loan at the school science library. These
 environments were designed to be able to allow students to
 perform clinical needs identification virtually by being able
 to go into a surgical suite to see the physician’s viewpoint
 as well as a 180-degree 3D view of the operating room. The
 students could also travel to other rooms to view the supplementary interviews and information (Fig. 3). Note that the
 full game-like environment presented in Fig. 3 was available
medical devices are designed but was not possible to be used in the Google Cardboard’s
 version, as this required students to use their phones and
 YouTube videos. For the Google Cardboard version, stuthrough human-centered design learning modules), and 6) dents watched these videos through YouTube playlists, such
potential design enhancements. Each group member pre- as the interview playlist described below.
sented insights based on their respective “specialty” regard- Alongside their virtual “tours” (Fig. 3, an example clip
ing the design criteria of the current medical tool. As an of the DBS procedure shown in the figure can be found
illustration, a student representing the “electrical engineer” here: https://​www.​youtu​be.​com/​shorts/​ttDVA​xnOQzU),
role detailed the circuitry and electrical evaluations of a they attended lectures and watched several online videos
blood pressure (BP) cuff required to take BP measurements consisting of informational videos on the technologies used
from a pressure sensor, while the one emulating a “computer and guided interviews with physicians, therapists, nurses,
scientist” outlined the user interface, data gathering, and staff, engineers, and entrepreneurs. These supplemental
software processing components of the BP monitor (Fig. 1). videos were used to understand the current needs of difAfter a regulatory controls lecture in the fourth week of the ferent environments that they encounter within the virtual
course, the students then performed an FDA strategy assign- experiences. The interviews were also provided via the folment to identify which standards would be required for their lowing YouTube playlist: https://w​ ww.y​ outub​ e.c​ om/p​ layli​ st?​
portion of the device. These exercises were mentored by list=​PLuCI​sTqjw​EZupB​5MxyS​U6DPB​piPsa​a42x. These
the instructor and instructional team to guide them through interviews provided context behind each medical procedure
probing questions based on how different types of engineer- and gave students an understanding of the history, current
ing and science combine to develop a medical device, and to standards of care, and future research of the particular field.
justify and expand upon the above tasks. After having gone through the guided clinical needs finding exercises during the reverse engineering stage of this

provided to the students as
part of their course materials.
The BNEXT VR Headset was
used as the Google Cardboard,
which allowed students to watch
videos in VR on YouTube using
their cell phones
386 C. E. King, D. Salvo

ing the main hospital environment where students can walk into: tional video of the technology (ROSA ONE Brain, Zimmer Biomet,
room 1) the VR medical procedure (e.g., a DBS procedure), room 2) Warsaw IN)

course, having selected their respective procedure, and hav- VR setting and over the duration of the course. Instructors
ing reviewed all the related content, each group performed assessed these notebooks in terms of completeness, ensurhomework assignments where they were asked to identify ing that more than three observations were performed, and
needs they can address as a biomedical engineer or other that students had identified any problems with correspondengineering discipline. ing design criteria and constraints within each observation.
 They used the needs they had identified to determine which
Unmet Clinical Needs Evaluation top three needs should be further evaluated in terms of their
 potential market, and what the best proposed solution would
After performing the learning modules using VR environ- be to pursue throughout their senior capstone course.
ments, videos, and supplemental material to identify medical
devices that are currently used in clinical practice, student Quantitative and Qualitative Analysis After
teams used their developed list of identified unmet clini- the Experimental Class
cal needs to evaluate which need is most viable to solve.
This was founded on a series of tasks: 1) assessment of the When experiencing a state of presence in a virtual environmarket scenario, 2) approach to intellectual property and its ment, the person in question psychologically feels as if they
challenges, 3) clinical approach and obstacles given current are physically present in the virtual environment. Because
standards of care, 4) regulatory plan, and 5) reimbursement presence is a perceptual phenomenon experienced by an
strategy. These concept screening and evaluation learning individual, presence, then, is a property of that person. Howmodules are based on Stanford University’s Biodesign: The ever, as Lombard and Ditton observe, presence “results from
Process of Innovating Medical Technologies textbook and an interaction among formal and content characteristics of
program [36]. For assessment purposes, students kept an a medium and characteristics of a media user, and therefore
“innovation notebook” which documented their observa- it can and does vary across individuals and across time for
tions, conversations, and review sessions conducted in the the same individual” [37]. Thus, the sensations of presence
Phenomenological Evaluation of an Undergraduate Clinical Needs Finding Skills Through a Virtual… 387

and embodiment one feels in an immersive virtual environ- view of the procedures whether viewed in a traditional 2D
ment are intensely subjective experiential phenomena. To video format or using our 3D VR experiences. As such, all
effectively evaluate and refine our virtual experiences, we versions presented students with a 180-degree view of the
utilized a phenomenological approach, a frequent choice operating room along with a POV of the acting physician,
among VR researchers, during our user feedback collection allowing students to more fully grasp the spectrum of staff
and analysis. Phenomenology acknowledges and attempts to and equipment active during each respective procedure.
address how not only our body but also our environments, Building our PC and VR experiences using Unreal Engine
and the objects, entities, and stimuli of which they consist, game design software [39] made it possible to locate all the
play a role in shaping conscious thought and behavior when respective content for each procedure (operation animadirectly experienced. As such, it is commonly adopted by tions and footage, interviews, and medical device equipment
VR researchers who focus on the human experience of such information) within a single navigable space. Though to a
technology [38]. minimal degree, these game-like experiences necessitated
 Given that human awareness is influenced by mental, a level of conscious interactivity to view each element of
environmental, and physical sensations, a phenomeno- the procedure by requiring navigation of the avatar to varilogical approach guides us to focus on the engagements ous locations as well as to access and manipulate the video
between users and the encompassing virtual environment. content. Moreover, at a phenomenological level VR first
Subsequently, after the course completion, we requested our works through sensory deprivation: depriving the user of
participants to fill out questionnaires to determine if the VR the visual and auditory sense-data of the physical environexperiences increased their sense of presence and whether or ment in which they are located; and secondly, by supplanting
not they found the VR versions more educationally benefi- the visual and auditory sense-data of objective reality with
cial than traditional 2D videos. We also had students list any that of the virtual world. The combination of a more realistic
ideas they may have for improving our educational content perspective made available by 3D VR technology, increased
and the VR experiences as well as list any educational use interactivity, and a forced narrowing of the students’ focus to
cases they think VR could be effectively used to improve solely the sense-data of the virtual experience created a more
learning (to view Survey 2’s questions see Appendix B.2. intensely immersive experience than traditional 2D videos.
Later, we initiated personal interviews with the volunteers
among survey participants. In these interactions, our aim The Most and Least Educationally Beneficial Clinical
was to discern their real-time experiences in the virtual Immersion Formats
realm by seeking insights into their feelings of presence,
embodiment, and their emotional responses to their immer- To investigate our hypothesis, the students completed a quession in a clinical space. We also asked students to follow- tionnaire at the end of the course and some participated in
up on the survey question and provide any ideas they think a brief interview. A breakdown of the student demographcould be used to improve our content and virtual experiences ics for those who participated in the survey can be seen in
(to view the interview questions, see Appendix B.3). Appendix Figs. 13, 14, 15, and 16. The goal of the survey
 was to identify whether or not the 3D VR clinical immersion
 experience elicits a greater degree of presence: the feeling
Results that they are physically and/or psychologically present in

3D VR Clinical Immersion Experiences Provide
a More Immersive Learning Experience

Given the lack of physical access to operating room environments, one of our goals was to simulate, as closely as
possible, the perspective of actually standing in the operating room during a procedure. Accordingly, we explored
two primary questions. Firstly, does 3D VR increase a felt
sense of presence? Secondly, do the students find our 3D
VR clinical experience to be more or less educationally
beneficial than traditional 2D video content? To make the
content scalable and widely available across all higher education institutions, we focused on providing the same overall
 increase the felt sensations of immersion and presence?”
388 C. E. King, D. Salvo

the operating room. Students were asked if the 3D VR versions elicited a greater degree of presence or whether all the
different versions were equal in this regard. 70% of students
noted the VR version elicited a greater felt sense of presence,
10% felt that all were equal, and 20% opined that it did not
increase their sense of presence (Fig. 4).
 Students were then asked to identify what they believed
was the most and least educationally beneficial versions.
There are numerous factors that can play a role in determining overall pedagogical efficacy of an educational experience including the method of content delivery, the visual
fidelity or quality of the content, ease of access, interactivity, and physical comfort or discomfort among many others. Fig. 6  Responses to the post-course survey question "What was the
Given how difficult it is to account for all such variations, least educationally beneficial version?"
we decided to take a more holistic approach by asking our
students to evaluate the most and least beneficial version realistic perspective offered by 3D VR and the sensory depaccording to their subjective experience and to then explain rivation aspect helped them focus on the content by cutwhat elements of that version made it better or worse than ting out the various distractions one typically faces in any
others. 40% of students felt the traditional 2D videos were environment: computer and phone notifications, background
the most beneficial, 20% chose the Google Cardboard, 20% sounds and movements, other people, etc. For those students
chose the Meta Quest 2, 20% believed all were equally ben- who felt the 2D version is better, our interviews suggested
eficial, and 10% selected the PC version (Fig. 5). the reason for this seems to lie in two primary factors: conAs for the least educationally beneficial version, 40% venience/ease of use and physical discomfort. As one stuof students claimed that the worst version was the Google dent described it, having to go to the library to check out the
Cardboard, 25% felt that none of the versions were notice- VR headset is “a hassle,” leading them to watch the Youably beneficial to their learning, 15% chose the PC version, Tube videos on their phone or computer out of convenience.
15% chose the traditional 2D videos, and only 5% believed
the Meta Quest version is the worst (Fig. 6).
 For those students who felt the 3D VR versions were the
most beneficial, 66.6% stated that the increased sense of
presence generated from the embodied first-person perspective offered by the HMD was what made it more beneficial,
26.7% claimed it was the increased ability to focus due to
the removal of distractions when wearing the HMD, and
6.7% felt the affordability and accessibility of, specifically,
the Google Cardboard are what made it the best (Appendix Fig. 8). The follow-up interviews corroborated that the
two primary factors leading to their selection were the more

most educationally beneficial version?" 20 students)
Phenomenological Evaluation of an Undergraduate Clinical Needs Finding Skills Through a Virtual… 389

Furthermore, 44.5% claimed ease of use (convenience/acces- Discussion
sibility, technical benefits such as variable playback speed,
better volume and playback controls, and ability to zoom in Given the goal that our educational content should be open
to the footage) was the reason the 2D version is better. 38.9% source and easily accessible for other BME programs to
stated that the physical discomfort (disorientation, weight of adopt, we had to make certain concessions in how the platthe headset for long periods of time, or the uncomfortability form was offered that influenced our data in identifiable
of wearing glasses with the headset) made the VR versions ways. For example, the cost-prohibitive nature of highless beneficial. 11.1% felt the lack of being able to take notes quality VR headsets like the Meta Quest 2 we used did not
while wearing the HMD made the VR versions worse, and allow us to deploy their usage in the classroom itself, rely5.6% never tried the VR version at all, leading them to select ing on the Google Cardboard HMDs instead. While we had
the 2D videos as the best (Fig. 7). several Meta Quest 2’s housed in the school’s library, not a
 single student went there to check one out. Because, as one
Prior Familiarity with VR and Traditional Video student phrased it, “it was a hassle” to physically obtain a
Games Effect on Choosing the Most Educationally headset for loan from the library when they could just watch
Beneficial Format the YouTube videos on their phone or computer, most of
 our students never tried the Meta Quest 2 during the course.
One element we also wanted to explore was whether one’s Out of those that did, almost all only viewed the YouTube
familiarity with VR and video games in general prior to videos rather than using the downloadable and interactive
taking the course affected their choice on whether the VR VR game-like versions. As some research has shown, conversion is better or worse educationally. While we expected venience is a crucial criteria for students over and against
that increased familiarity with VR and video games would other factors and students associated convenience with
lead those students to lean toward the VR versions, this was perceived learning and course satisfaction [40]. Additionnot the case. In fact, it seemed that the students with a higher ally, with regard to information-seeking practices in both
level of familiarity with VR and/or video games were more academic and everyday-life contexts, convenience is one of
likely to select the 2D video content as more educationally the primary criteria at work in making decisions throughout
beneficial. Interviews indicated that this is due to the sheer the information-seeking process to the point where, in some
lack of functionalities, visual fidelity, and overall polish of situations, quality or content will be readily sacrificed for the
the VR versions as they do not meet the production stand- sake of convenience [41]. Our student interviews corroboards of contemporary VR and traditional video games. For rated this, specifying convenient ease of access and qualthose students who felt the 2D version was more education- ity of life features like being able to adjust playback speed
ally beneficial, 66.7% had used VR at least once prior to in YouTube but not in VR as the primary factors leading
taking the course, 11.1% had never tried VR, 11.1% used to them either not checking out the VR headsets from the
VR at least once every three months, and 11.1% used VR on library or using the downloadable interactive VR experia weekly basis (Appendix Fig. 9). As for traditional video ences. In retrospect, our commitment to open access across
game usage, 66.7% of students who picked the 2D version a variety of devices and platforms apparently moved students
gamed on a weekly basis, 22.2% gamed at least once every to use the most convenient option available to them, making
three months, and 11.% gamed as a child or game very infre- it impossible to properly evaluate the pedagogical efficacy
quently (Appendix Fig. 10). For those students who thought of each version on equal grounds.
the VR versions were the most educationally beneficial, Another problematic element of our interactive VR learn66.7% had tried VR at least once prior to taking the course, ing environments is the lack of any real-time collaborative
and 33.3% had never tried VR before (Appendix Fig. 11). features. Students could only enter the VR environments by
Regarding traditional video game usage, 33.3% gamed as a themselves and could not work with others in the same virchild or on a very infrequent basis, 33.3% gamed weekly, tual environment. While we do intend to address this issue in
22.2% gamed at least once a month, and 11.1% gamed at future iterations, our VR learning environments will not be
least once every three months (Appendix Fig. 12). Interest- suitable for any kind of group work or team meetings until
ingly, given these survey results, there is a possible correla- such functionality is added. Furthermore, the elements of
tion between one’s familiarity with video games and their the VR versions which students noted as detrimental beyond
opinion as to the more educationally beneficial version of convenience, such as physical disorientation and discomfort,
our content. While more research needs to be conducted for unwieldy controls, and lack of quality of life and collabovalidation, superficially it appears as if the more a student rative features, were illuminating. It is likely that some of
plays video games, the more likely they are to select the 2D these issues would have been less relevant had the students
version as the most educationally beneficial. used the high-quality Meta Quest 2 rather than the Google
390 C. E. King, D. Salvo

Cardboard, which is a relatively horrible experience by com- until they begin to approach feature, if not quality, parity
parison. But this alone is not enough to suggest that our with user expectations of and experiences with consumer
students would have selected the interactive VR versions as video games. We still believe virtual learning environments
the most beneficial even if they had taken the time to check hold tremendous pedagogical potential for developing clinithe Quest 2’s out of the library. So while it is indisputable cal needs finding skills when in-person clinical access is
that a majority of our students felt that VR increased their not an option and serve as a viable alternative to 2D videos.
sense of presence and immersion, we cannot conclusively However, definitive success of interactive virtual learning
claim that interactive VR learning environments are more environments will likely depend on massively increasing
or less pedagogically efficacious compared to 2D videos at the quality and functionality of said environments as well
this point in time. making it more convenient and cohesively integrated into
 There also was an unexpected correlation between our the day-to-day workflows of our students.
students’ familiarity with traditional 2D gaming and VR Another limitation of the study is with regard to how the
usage and their overall opinion of our virtual learning VR content was filmed within the medical spaces. In particuenvironments. It seems as if the more familiar or often our lar, the medical procedures were filmed using a 180-degree
students game or used VR prior to taking this course, the stereoscopic camera to capture the entire operating room
more likely they were to select the 2D version as the most as well as the primary physician’s POV through a head
educationally beneficial. Conversely, our students who were mounted camera. Due to the locations of the surgical lightless familiar with gaming and VR prior to taking the course ing structures and other ceiling mounted equipment within
were more likely to select the VR version as being most a surgical suite, the need to film across different rooms, and
beneficial. This was a completely unforeseen result. While hospitals given limited funding for camera equipment, a
some of our students did account for various elements such full 360 view of the environment was not possible. To do
as the lack of collaborative functionality, we did not ask so would require semi-permanently installing cameras into
our students to address how and/or why their familiarity the ceiling and walls of a multi-purpose operating room.
with gaming may have influenced their overall opinion of To maximize the view of the environment while allowing
the effectiveness of our virtual learning environments. What users to fully visualize the procedure during filming, the
follows, therefore, is mostly our own speculation. 180-degree stereoscopic camera was placed against the wall
 One possible reason for this is the sheer novelty of expe- of the surgical suite. If no activities were taking place in
riencing VR or video game-like environments. In which the operating room beyond the operating table, we would
case, as the students continue to use VR for educational locate the camera closer to the procedure for a better view.
purposes the novelty factor will degrade over time, lessen- This allowed users to be able to fully visualize all activities
ing the students’ perceived pedagogical effectiveness of the within the setting while also allowing our camera operators
technology. While this is most definitely one factor, we do to relocate the equipment for use across different suites and
not believe this to be the primary criteria in overall student settings.
dissatisfaction. Rather, the nature of our interactive VR As we move forward, we plan to acquire more Meta Quest
and PC based learning environments fundamentally relies 2 headsets as well as have the instructor bring the headsets
on game engine software and game based mechanics for from the library so that each team group can utilize them
movement and interactions within the virtual space. Thus, during the class to fully immerse themselves into the clinical
a comparison between our rudimentary environments and procedures. We believe that this will allow for more accurate
traditional consumer gaming experiences is inevitable. In data collection with regard to the educational effectiveness
such a light, the visual fidelity or quality of our learning of higher quality VR headsets. Moreover, further refinement
environments, the amount of and types of interactivity made and development of our interactive learning modules via
available, and the sheer lack of features found in traditional a PC version made available for anyone with a computer
games like multiplayer functionality, voice chat, and cus- should also enhance the pedagogical effectiveness of our
tomizable avatars is severely lacking. Without a fully fledged virtual learning experiences. To this end, we plan to develop
professional development team, it is simply not possible to a game-like hospital environment where students can enter
produce virtual learning environments with the same qual- different surgical suites that will display VR medical proity and functionality as what is found in consumer gaming cedures, interviews, simulated medical student training
products. We believe this to be a crucial finding considering procedures (e.g., emergency room simulation-based trainthe pervasive use of video games and the general increase in ing https://​youtu.​be/​UnrQQ​s7hxdU or those presented in
the number of gamers worldwide. While additional research Singh et al. [42]), and other video content associated with
will be necessary to validate this, if this correlation turns the devices utilized or how the procedure is performed.
out to hold true it suggests that game-like virtual learning This multi-format deployment of our educational content
environments will be less positively received by students using 2D interview videos and 3D VR experiences made
Phenomenological Evaluation of an Undergraduate Clinical Needs Finding Skills Through a Virtual… 391

accessible across a range of devices (mobile, PC, and VR Appendix A: Figures
headsets) and platforms including YouTube and our course
database, lends itself to affordable scalability to include any See Figs. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16
number of students, classes, and disciplines. It should prove
to be effective in remote learning settings as well as being
used as educational content in a traditional classroom setting. Though access to high-quality VR devices is currently
cost-prohibitive for large-scale deployment, continued technological advancement will eventually drive down costs to
an acceptable level for mass deployment.
 The phenomenological effect of 3D VR technology
allows us to psychologically and sensorially immerse the
users in a virtual space to a greater degree than traditional
2D video content. As one of our students’ described it, VR
“allows you to immerse yourself in the environment. I mean
turning your head kind of puts you in the feeling that you
are in the operating room. So I would definitely say that in
terms of immersion, I would definitely prefer watching the
videos on the Meta Quest over YouTube.” The embodiment
granted by VR technology, allowing the user to participate
in the virtual environment through a first-person perspective,
increases the users’ felt sense of presence: of being psychologically and even physically present within the virtual environment. Given the highly subjective nature of the sensation
of presence in a virtual space, adequate comprehension of
the human user experience is paramount in further developing the effectiveness of virtual learning environments usage tion “Why VR is More Educationally Beneficial?” (No. Responses =
in undergraduate BME training. VR’s ability to increase the 20 students)
sense of presence and, at least in some cases, allow for better focus thanks to the lack of distractions while wearing an
HMD shows promise in developing more effective virtual
learning environments across a wide range of disciplines.
 Because VR learning environments are in their nascent
stage of development and practical application for undergraduate education, it remains unclear as to what functionalities and interactive elements will be the most crucial for
student learning. Understanding the way in which students
interact with virtual learning environments as well as what
they want from such environments will be paramount. Such
user feedback should help us determine the types of features
that will be the most important in creating virtual learning
environments that more effectively teach a concept, specific
body of knowledge, and enhance the development of practical skills like clinical needs finding and screening. Further
integration of digital technologies which track users' physiological data like eye tracking, pupil dilation, heart rate, heart Fig. 9  Percentages of respondents to “2D is more educationally
rate variability, and brain activity will enable the develop- beneficial” when asked about VR usage prior to the course (No.
ment of learning mechanisms that adapt to each individual’s Responses = 20 students).
learning pace. Therefore, while development in functionality, visual fidelity, and user interactivity will be needed, we
believe that the integration of VR learning environments will
ultimately evolve to become more pedagogically effective
than traditional 2D video content.
392 C. E. King, D. Salvo

eficial” when asked about video game usage prior to the course (No.
Responses = 20 students)

beneficial” when asked about VR usage prior to the course (No.
Responses = 20 students)

 college student?”

 Appendix B: Surveys and Interviews

 B.1 Survey 1: Submitted Prior to Taking the Course

beneficial” when asked about video game usage prior to the course 2. What academic year are you in?
(No. Responses = 20 students)
Phenomenological Evaluation of an Undergraduate Clinical Needs Finding Skills Through a Virtual… 393

 7. How do you think VR might be useful for helping to
 develop clinical needs finding skills? Please list the
 aspects of VR that you think will be educationally beneficial vs. traditional methods such as videos.
 8. What aspects of VR do you think might be an impedance
 to developing clinical needs finding skills? Please list
 any potential negatives you think VR will pose to your
 education.
 9. Are you excited or interested in using VR for educational
 purposes? Please explain why or why not.

 B.2 Survey 2: Submitted After Taking the Course
Note that zero students responded as “non-binary” or “prefer not to 1. Which experience did you find to be the most beneficial
answer.” to your learning?

 (a) VR Version: Meta Quest 2
 (a) Freshman (b) VR Version: Google Cardboard
 (b) Sophomore (c) PC Version
 (c) Junior (d) Traditional 2D Video Style (i.e., YouTube)
 (d) Senior (e) All were equally beneficial

3. What is your gender? 2. Which experience did you find to be the least beneficial
 to your learning?
 (a) Male
 (b) Female (a) VR Version: Meta Quest 2
 (c) Non-binary (b) VR Version: Google Cardboard
 (d) Prefer not to answer (c) PC Version
 (d) Traditional 2D Video Style (i.e., YouTube)
4. Are you a first-generation college student? (e) None were noticeable beneficial

 (a) Yes 3. Did the VR experiences elicit a greater degree of immer-
 (b) No sion, presence, and/or embodiment (the feeling that you
 (c) Prefer not to answer are actually present in the operating room/clinical environment)?
5. What is your familiarity with VR?
 (a) Yes
 (a) I have never used VR (b) No
 (b) I have used VR at least once (c) All were equally immersive
 (c) I use VR at least once every three months (d) None of them were immersive
 (d) I use VR at least once a week
 4. Which VR version did you think was the most educa6. What is your familiarity with video games in general tionally beneficial and why (VR: Meta Quest 2 or VR:
 (PC gaming, console gaming, mobile gaming)? Google Cardboard)?
 5. Which version did you find most effective and why (PC,
 (a) I have never played a video game VR: Meta Quest 2, VR: Google Cardboard, Traditional
 (b) I have played video games a few times or only 2D Video Style [YouTube])? (Please try to key in on
 when I was a child specific details of the experience that made it better
 (c) I play video games at least once every three than the other versions. For instance, perhaps the firstmonths person perspective and interactive controls of the VR:
 (d) I play video games at least once a week Meta Quest 2 experience enhanced immersion or your
 engagement with the material leading to a better learning experience overall).
394 C. E. King, D. Salvo

6. Which version did you find the least effective and why body of knowledge. Something akin to an interactive
 (PC, VR: Meta Quest 2, VR: Google Cardboard, Tradi- museum exhibits wherein you can engage with the matetional 2D Video Style [YouTube])? (Please try to key in rial individually or as a group.
 on specific details of the experience that made it worse
 than the other versions). B.3 Interview Questions: Conducted After Taking
7. Please list any ideas you have or potential features for the Course
 improving the VR: Meta Quest 2 and PC experiences.
 (For instance, having a multiplayer function that would 1. Did you find the VR experience to be more immersive
 allow groups to meet together in the virtual space or the and/or provide an increased sense of embodiment?
 ability to increase playback speed). Please describe what you liked and disliked and how
8. Please list any educational use cases where you think VR the VR environment made you feel.
 programs could be effectively used to improve learning 2. Do you think an increased sense of immersion and
 and why you think it will be more effective than tradi- embodiment will be better for clinical immersion edutional in-class or online learning methods. For instance: cation? Why or why not? Please try to list specific elea virtual space where you could meet up in groups for ments to support your opinion.
 more effective remote teamwork. Or, a virtual learn- 3. What elements should be added or improved to make the
 ing environment where everyone meets using avatars VR versions more educationally beneficial?
 for online classes rather than zoom lectures. Interactive 4. What could be improved about the overall experience of
 virtual spaces designed to teach a specific concept or our educational content and experiences in general?
Phenomenological Evaluation of an Undergraduate Clinical Needs Finding Skills Through a Virtual… 395

Appendix C: Sample of Student Devised
Interview: Questions and Answers

 Funding Research reported here was supported by the VentureWell
Author Contributions CK conceived the study and design, oversaw
 Faculty Grant Program (Award No. 19823-19) and the National Instithe filming and interviews, developed and instructed the course, and
 tute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering of the National Instico-wrote the article. DS conceived of and conducted the surveys and
 tutes of Health (Award No. R25EB031116).
interviews, collected and analyzed the final data, and co-wrote the article. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
 Data Availability All data and course materials can be provided by
 emailing the author: kingce@uci.edu.
396 C. E. King, D. Salvo

Code Availability Not applicable. 6. Moravec KR, Lothamer EL, Hoene A, Wagoner PM, Beckman
 DJ, Goergen CJ. Clinical immersion of undergraduate biomediDeclarations cal engineering students: best practices for short-term programs.
 Biomed Eng Educ. 2023;3:217–23.
Conflict of interest The authors have no conflict of interest to declare 7. Holden C, Moser A. Survival guide for clinical engineering milthat is relevant to the content of this article. lennials. Biomed Instrum Technol. 2016;50(6):422–6.
 8. Rodriguez NM, Burleson G, Linnes JC, Sienko KH. Thinking
Consent to Participate Informed consent was obtained from all indi- beyond the device: an overview of human-and equity-centered
vidual participants included in the study and in the filming procedures. approaches for health technology design. Ann Rev Biomed Eng.
 2023;25:257–80.
Consent for Publication Students were informed of our intent to publish 9. Kotche M, Felder AE, Wilkens K, Stirling S. Perspectives on
the survey results and voluntarily consented to share their responses. Bioengineering clinical immersion: history, innovation, and
All filmed participants were informed and consented to use the filmed impact. Ann Biomed Eng. 2020;48:2301–9.
procedures for educational use only. 10. Mittal V, Thompson M, Altman SM, Taylor P, Summers A,
 Goodwin K, Louie AY. Clinical needs finding: developEthical Approval The filming of the environments was approved under ing the virtual experience: a case study. Ann Biomed Eng.
UCI Institutional Review Board (IRB) Exempt No. 15531 for UCI 2013;41:1899–912.
Medical Center filming and 1184 for UCI School of Medicine and 11. Brennan-Pierce EP, Stanton SG, Dunn JA. Clinical immersion for
School of Nursing filming locations. The assessment of environments biomedical engineers: pivoting to a virtual format. Biomed Eng
in the course through student surveys and interviews was approved Educ. 2021;1(1):175–9.
under UCI IRB Exempt No. 904. Students, healthcare workers, and 12. Pottle J. Virtual reality and the transformation of medical educapatients were provided informed consent through the above IRB pro- tion. Fut Healthcare J. 2019;6(3):181.
tocols. 13. Baniasadi T, Ayyoubzadeh SM, Mohammadzadeh N. Challenges
 and practical considerations in applying virtual reality in medical
 education and treatment. Oman Med J. 2020;35(3): e125.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri- 14. Tamim RM, Bernard RM, Borokhovski E, Abrami PC, Schmid
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta- RF. What forty years of research says about the impact of technoltion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long ogy on learning. Rev Educ Res. 2011;81(1):4–28.
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 15. Meyer OA, Omdahl MK, Makransky G. Investigating the effect
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes of pre-training when learning through immersive virtual realwere made. The images or other third party material in this article are ity and video: a media and methods experiment. Comput Educ.
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 2019;140:103603.
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 16. Singh A, Ferry D, Ramakrishnan A, Balasubramanian S. Using
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not virtual reality in biomedical engineering education. J Biomech
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will Eng. 2020;142(11):111013–21.
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 17. Makransky G, Lilleholt L. A structural equation modeling invescopy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. tigation of the emotional value of immersive virtual reality in
 education. Educ Technol Res Dev. 2018;66(5):1141–64.
 18. Makransky G, Terkildsen TS, Mayer RE. Adding immersive virtual reality to a science lab simulation causes more presence but
References less learning. Learn Instr. 2019;60:225–36.
 19. Bertram J, Moskaliuk J, Cress U. Virtual training: making reality
 1. Stephens JS, Rooney SI, Arch ES, Higginson J. Bridging courses: work? Comput Hum Behav. 2015;43:284–92.
 unmet clinical needs to capstone design (work in progress). In: 20. Çakiroglu Ü, Gökoglu S. Development of fire safety behavioral
 26, 2016, New Orleans, Louisiana. Available: ASEE PEER, 21. Piccione J, Collett J, De Foe A. Virtual skills training: the role of
 https://​doi.​org/​10.​18260/p.​26393. presence and agency. Heliyon. 2019;5(11): e02583.
 2. Kadlowec J, Merrill T, Sood S, Greene Ryan J, Attaluri A, Hirsh 22. Hon N, Yeo N. Having a sense of agency can improve memory.
 R. Clinical immersion and team-based design: into a third year. In: Psychon Bull Rev. 2021;28:946–52.
 24-28, 2017, Columbus, Ohio. Available: ASEE PEER, https://​ Kalina E. Embodied agentic STEM education: effects of 3D VR
 doi.​org/​10.​18260/1-​2-​28040. compared to 2D PC. In: 2020 6th International Conference of the
 3. Guilford WH, Keeley M, Helmke BP, Allen TE. Work in pro- Immersive Learning Research Network (iLRN), pp. 24–30, 2020.
 gress: a clinical immersion program for broad curricular impact. 24. Tham J, Duin AH, Gee L, Ernst N, Abdelqader B, McGrath M.
 Tampa, Florida. Available: ASEE PEER, https://​doi.​org/​10.​ sional practice. IEEE Trans Profess Commun. 2018;61(2):178–95.
 18260/1-​2-​33581. 25. Gunnar RR, Sroufe LA. Competence, autonomy, and relatedness:
 4. Guilford WH, Kotche M, Schmedlen RH. A survey of clinical a motivational analysis of self-system processes. In: Gunnar MR,
 immersion experiences in biomedical engineering. Biomed Eng Sroufe LA, editors. Self processes and development. Mahwah:
 Educ. 2023;3:113–22. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.,; 1991. p. 43–77.
 5. Engineering and Engineering Technology by the Numbers. 26. Duckworth E. The having of wonderful ideas and other essays on
 In: Profiles of Engineering and Engineering Technology, 2021. 27. Reading CE. Recognising and Measuring Engagement in ICT-rich
 Available https://​ira.​asee.​org/​wp-​conte​nt/​uploa​ds/​2022/​11/​Engin​ Learning Environments. In: Australian Computers in Education
 eering-​and-​Engin​eering-​Techn​ology-​by-​the-​Numbe​rs-​2021.​pdf. Conference Papers. ACEC: Australian Computers in Education;
Phenomenological Evaluation of an Undergraduate Clinical Needs Finding Skills Through a Virtual… 397

28. Shernoff DJ. Optimal learning environments to promote student 36. Yock PG, Zenios S, Makower J, Brinton TJ, Kumar UN, Watkins
 engagement. New York: Springer; 2013. FTJ, Denend L, Krummel TM, Kurihara CQ. Biodesign: the pro29. Lindgren R, Tscholl M, Wang S, Johnson E. Enhancing learning cess of innovating medical technologies. Cambridge: Cambridge
 and engagement through embodied interaction within a mixed University Press; 2015.
 reality simulation. Comput Educ. 2016;95:174–87. 37. Lombard M, Ditton T. At the heart of it all: the concept of pres30. King CE, Hoo CM, Tang WC, Khine M. Introducing entrepreneur- ence. J Comput Med Commun. 1997;3(2):321.
 ship into a biomedical engineering capstone course at the Univer- 38. Morie JF. Ontological implications of being in immersive virsity of California, Irvine. Technol Innovat. 2019;20(3):179–95. tual environments. In: SPIE Proceedings 6804, The Engineering
31. Prinsley R, Baranyai K. STEM Skills in the Workforce: What Do Reality of Virtual Reality, Jan. 27–31, 2008, San Jose, California,
 Employers Want?. In: Occasional Paper Series, vol. 9, Canberra: no. 680408, I. E. McDowall, M. Dolinsky, Eds. pp. 1–12, 2008.
 Australian Government’s Office of the Chief Scientist, Mar. 2015. Available from: https://​doi.​org/​10.​1117/​12.​778617.
 Available: https://​www.​chief​scien​tist.​gov.​au/​sites/​defau​lt/​files/​ 39. Epic Games. Unreal Engine, version 4.27, Cary, North Carolina.
 OPS09_​02Mar​2015_​Web.​pdf Available from: https://​www.​unrea​lengi​ne.​com.
32. Meta, Meta Quest 2, Menlo Park, CA. https://​www.​meta.​com/​ 40. Sanford D, Ross D, Rosenbloom A, Singer D. Course conveniquest/​produ​cts/​quest-2/ ence, perceived learning, and course satisfaction across course
33. Kwak H, Blackburn J, Han S. Exploring cyberbullying and other formats. J Bus Educ Scholarsh Teach. 2017;11(1):69–84.
 toxic behavior in team competition online games. In: Proceed- 41. Connaway LS, Dickey TJ, Radford ML. If it is too inconings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in venient I’m not going after it: convenience as a critical factor
 Computing Systems, pp. 3739–3748. ACM, 2015. in information-seeking behaviors. Library Inform Sci Res.
34. Osterwalder A, Pigneur Y. Business model generation: a hand- 2011;33(3):179–90.
 book for visionaries, game changers, and challengers. Hoboken: 42. Singh A, Ferry D, Balasubramanian S. Efficacy of clinical simuWiley; 2010. lation-based training in biomedical engineering education. J Bio35. Criteria for Accrediting Engineering Programs, 2022–2023 mech Eng. 2019;141(12):121011–8.
 ABET. n.d. Available: https://​www.​abet.​org/​accre​ditat​ion/​accre​
 ams-​2022-​2023/. jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
