S25-R017|Q10|VR programs could be effectively used in training scenarios for anybody going into a science related field. For example, a student who is going to school to become a dentist can utilize a VR program to simulate practice in the real world. This also applies for many occupations.
S25-R018|Q5|I like the resources that we were given, it's cool to learn about it all.
S25-R018|Q6|I think the level of instruction could be improved, as well as the virtual learning platform. It's a bit annoying to go through, and I don't really see any benefits compared to the youtube videos.
S25-R018|Q9|Make it easier to run.
S25-R018|Q10|Maybe in more hands on learning situations it could be more effective.
S25-R019|Q5|I thought the lecture videos and quizzes were most useful in helping to write unmet needs and value proposition statements for the final report. I think this will also help with senior design.
S25-R019|Q6|I think I would personally like it better if this course was in person.. it is a little hard to work remotely on a project especially if group members are not responsive.
S25-R019|Q9|N/A
S25-R019|Q10|Maybe in education for medical students; not just to watch medical procedures but also to explore interactive 3D models of the human body. Maybe they would be able to zoom into specific organs and blood vessels. This would be helpful because real human subjects or realistic models are not always accessible.
S25-R020|Q5|I found the calculations most useful as they used our daily meals to find our individual intake.
S25-R020|Q6|If zoom sessions were designed in a way where it could be benefitial for large groups it would help, having someone asking questions in zoom is useful until it is overdone and we can't follow with the lesson.
S25-R020|Q9|I had to use the youtube videos
S25-R020|Q10|I think individual vr programs are better because group settings may be doing to much lessening the expirence.
S25-R021|Q5|I think the lectures gave the most direct information relevant to the course. The Vr was nice but it wasn't super useful in my opinion. It was harder to navigate than just regular youtube videos.
S25-R021|Q6|I think the VR platform was a not the most useful and at times it made t harder to understand and navigate the assignmentsI and videos
S25-R021|Q9|I think having organized links relevant to every week would help, even if its in the simulation.
S25-R021|Q10|something that comes in my head is maybe a vr simulation with multiple characters. These people can be in one room together and interact in spaces such as in real life.
S25-R022|Q5|I believe the view on unmet needs is an important aspect that engineers should always consider and try to work around that. This course has helped me remind myself of what it means to be an engineer.
S25-R022|Q6|The videos could be a bit remodeled because it tends to be monotonous and boring
S25-R022|Q9|The actual idea of having the VR clinic is amazing, the videos and images that come with it not so much
S25-R022|Q10|VR immersive spaces for engineers who design devices, buildings, cars so that they can see the outcome or impact of their work before it happens
S25-R023|Q5|e most useful aspect of the course was the integration of real-world clinical insights with engineering principles. The VR clinical immersion helped bridge the gap between theoretical knowledge and practical, real-life settings, making the learning experience more engaging and impactful.
S25-R023|Q6|The course could be improved by offering more interactive VR simulations and case studies that allow students to make decisions during clinical scenarios. Additionally, incorporating more global case comparisons would help in understanding diverse healthcare settings better.
S25-R023|Q9|n/a
S25-R023|Q10|VR could be effectively used for simulated surgeries where students can practice procedures without real-world consequences. It would also be beneficial for anatomy classes, where students can interact with 3D models of the human body. These methods provide a hands-on, immersive experience that is more engaging and effective compared to traditional lectures or static online materials.
S25-R024|Q5|I found the weekly video quizzes the most useful
S25-R024|Q6|There could be some more direction about what kinds of things to look out for during the surgery videos when it comes to making unmet needs statements and gap analyses
S25-R024|Q9|Maybe separating each video into its own screen could help, since it would help delineate between them
S25-R024|Q10|I think it would be useful for the VR space to be used to aid group meetups. Since this was a remote class with no proper lecture meetup, it was occasionally difficult to get group members to meet up at one time to discuss things
S25-R025|Q5|I found the clinical observations useful because I got a closer look at what different surgeries, surgical suites, and procedures look around the world. As a bme student, it is easy to get pigeon holed into focusing on the math and not realize the impact that medicine creates on people around the world. It was really fun seeing physician interviews and patients' interactions to see what medicine and health care is all about.
S25-R025|Q6|Clearer instructions for the innovation notebook and final project will be very much appreciated. Even though the instructions for the final project are very clear, maybe giving examples for the GNATT chart and what group member roles are expected will be useful. But I understand that giving examples might hinder a group's creativity and how they might have answered a particular question.
S25-R025|Q9|I do not have any recommendations to improve the VR clinical immersion platform. I honestly think that the platform is really great and I learned a lot from watching the procedures.
S25-R025|Q10|Maybe VR can be used in a virtual learning environment. Maybe a safety tutorial for science classes in which students can learn about what to do in a laboratory setting. It will ensure that students are safe but also get to explore a laboratory space.
S25-R026|Q5|I feel like more in person and forced meeting with your group.
S25-R026|Q6|Less group work
S25-R026|Q9|Make it more easier ti download
S25-R026|Q10|Perhaps in labs where access to equipment is hard. Or in physics demos
S25-R027|Q5|I found the information about the FDA process and how to identify important needs in healthcare useful.
S25-R027|Q6|I think the VR space should be worked on so that it is more accessible and user-friendly.
S25-R027|Q9|I did not use the VR clinical immersion platform so I can't give any feedback.
S25-R027|Q10|I think VR spaces would be useful in cases where a simulation would benefit the student's learning of the material. For example, lets say a student is learning a concept in chemistry. It would be cool if they could enter a VR space to immerse themselves in a lab experience where they test out the concept and experiment with it. This would be better because a tranditional in-class lab might not be able to properly show that concept due to variability.
S25-R028|Q5|I think the thing that I found the most useful was being able to compare two procedures in the videos we were provided. We were able to compare the same procedures from the different countries that showed the level of care and infrastructure that each place could support. It was different for each place and being able to make it seem like we were in the procedure and watching made it more immersive rather than boring.
S25-R028|Q6|I think that one of the aspects that could be improved were the directions and a bit more explanation of what was happening. I think that some of the directions were unclear and how to do the assignments for example was confusing. When doing the gap analysis I was a bit confused on whether or not I was doing it right or if they were actual unmet needs. The gap analysis was also something I found a bit confusing. In the videos they just preformed the procedure and for some of them that I watched, I did not know what some of the instruments were and what they were used for so that hindered my ability to understand what was fully happening and the gap analysis.
S25-R028|Q9|I think that it should be optimized to support lower end computers. I felt that a lot of the time, even at the lowest settings, it was hard to run and made it hard to even go around and watch the videos at all. A lot of the controls did not seem to work for me.
S25-R028|Q10|I think that it would be beneficial to have when meeting remotely and you could meet online. Where you could go up to each procedure and interact with each of the instruments and what is happening in the procedure to explain to other groupmates. It seems easier to pay attention to because it is more interactive and if improvements could be made, it could allow for better collaboration.
S25-R029|Q5|One of the most helpful parts of the course was the check-in quiz. It showed me what I already understood and what I needed to work on more, so I felt like I was learning at my own pace. It was a good way to see how much I was improving, and it made me feel more sure of myself. I liked that the quiz wasn’t stressful but actually helped me figure out what I needed to learn better. It was a nice way to check in and see how I was doing before moving on to the next part.
S25-R029|Q6|I think the course could be even better if there was more group work. Working with others would let us share ideas and learn from each other, which can make things easier to understand. It also makes the class feel more fun and less lonely when we get to talk with classmates. Plus, group work would help us practice working together, which is something we’ll need in any job. Overall, I think more group work would make the class more interesting and help everyone learn more.
S25-R029|Q9|The VR clinical immersion platform could be improved by adding more step-by-step explanations for the medical procedures. It would also be helpful to have quizzes or questions pop up during the VR experience to check if we understand what’s happening. Lastly, including more real-life scenarios or challenges would make it even more engaging and help us learn better.
S25-R029|Q10|I think VR could be great for learning about things like how the body works in science or medical classes because you can see and move around inside the body. It would also be awesome for practicing job skills, like working in a store or fixing something, because it feels more real than reading about it. VR can also help people learn how to talk to customers or work in teams because you can act out real situations. It’s better than regular classes because it feels like you’re really there, so you remember more and feel more connected to what you’re learning.
S25-R030|Q5|The lecture videos were very detailed and helped explain many of the course modules
S25-R030|Q6|The interactive site is great but still a little confusing, also the innovation notebook.
S25-R030|Q9|Maybe add like an actual simulation where the viewers can interact with.
S25-R030|Q10|My group and I communicated through discord, so anything where its similar to that.
S25-R031|Q5|What I found most useful was the information learned in this course. For example, I learned the process of creating a device or idea and the branches we have to go through. I also found the VR platform and videos very very useful and fun. It was eye opening to realize how advantageous we have it here in the US as I never really thought about the unmet clinical needs in other countries.
S25-R031|Q6|The Final Group Paper at the end of the quarter was quite a handful. I understand that we were told about it since the beginning of the quarter and had check in's in weeks 5 and 7 however, I feel that was not enough time to grasp the requirements of the paper. If we were told/encourage to start the paper early, or at least have the check in's earlier like week 2 or 3 to prepare for the paper would be very helpful. Also, if there was some guidance or recommendations such as having some of the requirements for the paper done during this and that week would make the workload and stress more bearable.
S25-R031|Q9|Some of the videos had the actual surgical screen far in the back which made it hard to see how the surgeries are going so maybe that can be changed to where we can click on the screen of the surgical sight to get a better view. Also, if the videos were more organized in order on the website for example, if the TAVR videos were all grouped together or if the countries were grouped together, would make it more educationally beneficial.
S25-R031|Q10|VR programs could be effectively used to improve learning in settings especially in the medical field or even engineering field. It enables first-hand experience in a way that allows hands-on but not at the same time. I feel this is more beneficial then in a traditional in-class or online learning method since it allows one to physically/mentally picture the surgeries or the processes of the engineering projects and etc. These virtual spaces also allow more involvement and stimulation making it more motivating to learn. It can also be used in younger educational systems to teach them real-life scenarios such as interviews and internships.
S25-R032|Q5|The videos.
S25-R032|Q6|Placing the needed material for the report in one section instead of scattered throughout the weeks.
S25-R032|Q9|More optimization for smoother VR performance.
S25-R032|Q10|It's probably useful for classes that require some practical application of knowledge such as labs. Physical attendance is much more effective for learning practical applications, in my opinion, but for classes where resources are limited or students who cannot attend due to certain circumstances, VR could be useful.
S25-R033|Q5|I think the nice, concise videos were easy to follow and good to learn from. I would say those contributed to me learning about processes, optimal thinking, and challenges in the industry.
S25-R033|Q6|I think the VR program needs more tweaking, especially to work on a less powerful computer, because, at least for me, my laptop sounded like it was about to blow up after 5 minutes.
S25-R033|Q9|I think it's a good idea to take little notes during the experience to explain to the viewer what is happening and why.
S25-R033|Q10|i think a class where its like an empty room, and students use real vr headsets around eachother, and they try to complete a task.
S25-R034|Q5|The videos on the VR website.
S25-R034|Q6|The VR platform is too cumbersome to get working on your computer, most students just resort to the online videos.
S25-R034|Q9|Unsure.
S25-R034|Q10|VR has a lot of potential for education, but I feel that this course is ahead of its time. When VR headsets are more common in the future, classes like these will be a huge success.
S25-R035|Q5|The project and lecture videos were most useful for me.
S25-R035|Q6|I wish there was a bit more guidance in watching the clinical procedures. Some of them are many hours long, and I'm not sure what exactly to be looking for during that time.
S25-R035|Q9|Some sort of exaplanation for some of the more involved/longer procedures.
S25-R035|Q10|Anatomy classes. Maybe VR could be used for other biological studies courses, like cell or plant physiology, but the main way I can envision VR programs being used is to accurately model internal animal systems.
S25-R036|Q5|I think about the market is the most useful because its such a broad thing, and by knowing the market what to target and what to look into it truly helpful
S25-R036|Q6|I think some aspect is still a but confuse like the innovation notebook and group work. Now that we’re done everything is clearer but half way across the course I literally didn’t know what we’re doing. And some expectation id unclear because my teammate were confuse about some of the chart requirements and stuff like that.
S25-R036|Q9|I didnt use it :”)
S25-R036|Q10|Virtual online class and meeting teammate sounds so so cool i would love it, or museum is amazing too but it would be hard and some student might not be able to access but that sounds super cool!!!
S25-R037|Q5|I found the wide variety of different surgical operations on the VR platform very helpful and informative when learning about unmet needs.
S25-R037|Q6|I think the group project aspect could be improved. It was often very difficult to communicate with group members and keep track of everyone's progress and often times others had to do more work in order to make progress in the project. I think a good think would be to assign certain VR on video to watch weekly so that all members could stay on track. because the main issues was people were just waiting too last minute to watch the videos.
S25-R037|Q9|The being able to switch between videos and speeding them up or down could have been very helpful. Whenever I missed an important part and video and wanted to rewind the platform would glitch and I would just have to rewatch from the beginning most times.
S25-R037|Q10|I liked the idea of using the VR platform to do collaborative work and the possibility of using it like an interactive museum exhibit. I think maybe one step further possible further in the future could be almost designing it similar to video game. Just a platform where you can meet up with group members and work together to complete lessons ensuring everyone is contributing equal to complete the lesson before being allowed to move on. I think this can promote accountability, collaboration, and also just allow students to a have a fun time while learning.
S25-R038|Q5|One of the most useful aspects of this course was the opportunity to learn about real-world clinical settings through a global lens. I appreciated being introduced to challenges that healthcare workers face across different countries, especially in terms of technology, infrastructure, and safety. It made me more aware of how design and innovation must be inclusive and adaptable to different environments.
S25-R038|Q6|The course would benefit from more detailed and clearer assignment instructions, including examples from past projects. This additional guidance would help students better understand the expectations and requirements, making it easier to start and navigate through the project.
S25-R038|Q9|To make the VR platform more educational, it could include interactive annotations or quizzes that reinforce key concepts, for example, clicking on equipment to learn its name, function, and safety details. Adding guided voiceovers or scenario-based tasks would increase engagement. An interactive avatar feature that allows users to comment and interact with peers or even real doctors in real time would also enhance collaboration and clinical insight.
S25-R038|Q10|VR is highly effective in fields like healthcare, engineering, and science, where spatial awareness and hands-on practice are key. It can simulate surgeries, emergency protocols, or device prototyping, allowing students to practice safely. VR also offers access to hard-to-reach environments like rural clinics, making it valuable for global training. Compared to traditional lectures, it promotes active learning and makes complex concepts more tangible and memorable.
S25-R039|Q5|the weekly quizzes helped me stay on top of my work, so that's definitely good. the lecture content was good and helpful.
S25-R039|Q6|the vr learning platform wasn't accessible, and i think if youtube videos do the job, they do the job. some things don't need to be improved on; take the paperclip for example. the innovation notebook was restricted to the youtube videos, but there's so many more innovations outside of the hospital setting that we could write about and learn about.
S25-R039|Q9|i didn't get to really use it, since it didn't work on my apple computer.
S25-R039|Q10|i think this is helpful when it comes to treating patients and doing hands on activities, like surgeries where practice is really helpful. nothing beats the real thing, but this is definitely a step in the right direction. meeting up in virtual spaces doesn't make much sense, since we can always do that in person, and it's more fun in person. we shouldn't try to replace in person and real human interactions with virtual meetings. interactive museum exhibits aren't really helpful. vr where we could be transported to the actual situation we're learning about, such as points in history, would be a lot more useful.
S25-R040|Q5|I found the weekly lecture videos correlated to the actual quizzes extremely helpful.
S25-R040|Q6|Rubric directions for the innovation lab notebook and group project (please provide an example that CANNOT be copied) as well as live meetings more frequent in the quarter?
S25-R040|Q9|N/A did not use.
S25-R040|Q10|* remote teamwork VR space weekly meetings, to ensure accountability and involvement in course throughout! / / * I would prefer a VR environment as mentioned where everyone meets using avatars at a posted time rather than synchronous zoom lectures. / / * Interactive museum exhibits as opposed to final reports may be more impactful as well, as well as presentations for our innovation lab notebook.
S25-R041|Q5|I found it helpful the weekly videos helpful, they were really interesting. I wish it were a bit longer to guide us on what our weekly innovation notebook would look like and what working with our group would look like, other than just viewing information. But I still really liked the video, and the professor is straightforward with her words, which I really liked because I didn't get distracted. I also found it helpful that she answers her Gmail and her office hours. I also really liked the VR videos that we get to choose different ones to watch from because that's how I am engaged in doing the assignment.
S25-R041|Q6|Some aspect I would say is like the innovation notebook explanation, like maybe showing an example of how it would look. I would also say the professor meets with the team once every two weeks to see what's going on because my group is pretty good, it's just very poor communication and one-sided type of situations. So maybe with a meeting we can be on the same pace with the work. It felt alot of disconnection.
S25-R041|Q9|I like the VR videos, but it would be beneficial to have a voice-over explaining in depth what's happening or even critiquing what's going on in the video. Because at times during the videos, I had to look up what's going on and what this and that should look like to get a better understanding.
S25-R041|Q10|I think VR programs would be good in science labs because of the cost of items in labs tends to be and also to avoid accidents. VR programs, I think of it as trying something without actually doing it, to see if the real thing can be an option. So I would say in practicing for getting a driving license (ex. driving in the streets vr simulator) .
S25-R042|Q5|The videos from the virtual reality website were interesting to engage with and the group work was very helpful to communicate with and get feedback from peers.
S25-R042|Q6|None that I could discern.
S25-R042|Q9|maybe like some text notes to describe certain things about what's going on like the tools being used and stuff, or like small questions to keep the person watching engaged.
S25-R042|Q10|It could be useful in a virtual simulation of a lab setting. Sometimes especially with undergraduate labs certain chemicals or experiments might be too dangerous to perform but with it being a simulation you can perform anything without the risk and hazards, and it also would be cost-effective because the resources and chemicals and machinery can cost a lot. Another useful tool would be for anatomy and physiology like a virtual reality where you perform dissections to explore and learn about the body.
S25-R043|Q5|I found the weekly lecture videos very helpful during this course. I loved how they were not very time consuming and straight forward.
S25-R043|Q6|Some aspects of the course that could be improved would be instructions on certain assignments. I feel like the directions could be clearer, yet I enjoyed how the professor was easy to reach regarding the confusion.
S25-R043|Q9|I would add background information at least when it came to surgeries, because we were able to see the process; however, I found it confusing when trying to figure out why they were doing certain things. Therefore I feel it would make it more beneficial.
S25-R043|Q10|I feel like VR programs could be effectively used with online courses so you become more engaged with the content. Also, I feel like having the professor or instructor logged in at the same time, explaining what we're visualizing, would be incredibly helpful.
S25-R044|Q5|The use of VR was made the class interactive and interesting. The weekly quizes were helpful in staying on track.
S25-R045|Q5|I found this course the most realistic and introductory to what BME majors will do after university.
S25-R045|Q6|I think more content and better surgery videos, however, I know the second one is hard.
S25-R045|Q9|I think being able to walk around in the VR room, having the sergons with microphones and cameras that are not moving or sliding off the sergon's head.
S25-R045|Q10|I think having the virtual space is great, but it needs to be more interactive or engaging with the procedure during the surgery.
S25-R046|Q5|The most helpful parts of the course comes from the studies it provides
S25-R046|Q6|The parts that I think needs to be improved are the activeness of the class
S25-R046|Q9|I think there should be more detailed courses attached
S25-R046|Q10|I think it could be used in clinical cases
S25-R047|Q5|I found the quizzes most helpful in checking for my understanding during video lectures, and ensuring that I on on top of each week's material.
S25-R047|Q6|More resources that could help explain the lectures and topics that were covered by the lectures.
S25-R047|Q9|Maybe labels or some kind of text around the VR videos that explains the processes going on.
S25-R047|Q10|It could help with group projects in making meeting up more easy and effective for everyone; as college students people have differing schedules, so working together or having discussions in a virtual space would make group projects and communication a lot easier.
S25-R048|Q5|I found the online course format very useful--especially the VR classroom space. I thought it was really cool to navigate, and helped compartmentalize individual findings.
S25-R048|Q6|I think the overall smoothness and integration of the VR classroom could be improved to provide a more seamless integration with the coursework. It would be really cool to have the surgery videos actually be 3D, VR compatible rather than simply 2D watching through the virtual classroom.
S25-R048|Q9|Already mentioned above
S25-R048|Q10|I think in terms of relevant instruction, such as teaching students how to suture, or immersive surgery videos for med students, the VR program could completely revolutionize image training for students before they perform procedures themselves.
S25-R049|Q5|the vr applications
S25-R049|Q6|more clarity on final and innovation notebook and examples
S25-R049|Q9|mauybe to make it more tailored to each students interests and learning habits, if somebody maybe learns better through other methods of learning, that could be helpful
S25-R049|Q10|i think a note taking ai applicaiton could be helpful or something that summarizes the transcripts of videos
S25-R050|Q5|The videos were really great I feel like I'm actually learning something that will affect my career.
S25-R050|Q6|NA
S25-R050|Q9|NA
S25-R050|Q10|labs for sure
S25-R052|Q5|Although most of the information was covered in BME 180, I enjoyed that I got to reinforce my ideas.
S25-R052|Q6|I think for a 1 unit class, the work load was on the heavier side.
S25-R052|Q9|Make assignments based on the VR clinical immersion
S25-R052|Q10|N/A
S25-R053|Q5|From this course, I was able to learn a lot of the combination in economics, public health, policy, and ethics to see how multiple systems are influencing global health outcomes. The flexibility of rewatching video lectures and being able to access the lecture as a pdf helps me focus at my own pace. To also see how healthcare is so different across the entire world is so interesting because some countries are still not as developed as others are.
S25-R053|Q6|For a class that is asynchronous, it is often hard to get in contact with other classmates, especially if we are given many class assignments. Often it is out of our control on who responds to us in a timely manner and not.
S25-R053|Q9|Perhaps more ways for students to engage by "interacting" in clinical decision makings.
S25-R053|Q10|Clinical stimulations for students that are set in healthcare can fully immerse themselves to practice procedures or assessments at low-risk environments.
S25-R054|Q5|Gave a nice indepth view of how to do research and find unmet clinical needs so we can go build a product on that.
S25-R054|Q6|The VR can definitely be improved.
S25-R054|Q9|VR, atleast for me, seems to get stuch a lot. So add better range of motion.
S25-R054|Q10|Getting indepth view of surgical processes, doing deeper research into a topic and at a different setting (VR can help you transport there), research at a microscopic of macroscopic levels.
S25-R055|Q5|I really enjoyed watching the various procedures. I found them all very interesting and it contributed to my knowledge as I was able to see how certain procedures were actually done. Furthermore, the video lectures about global needs and addressing unmet needs were intriguing to me.
S25-R055|Q6|The clarity of the grading rubrics for the innovation notebook, the check ins, and the final project itself. I often found myself confused on what was expected of me for these assignments and since I could not attend office hours due to scheduling conflicts, it was hard to get the clarification that I needed.
S25-R055|Q9|Maybe captions that highlight what the surgeon or medical professional is doing and why and how it contributes to the overall procedure would be helpful. It might not contribute to unmet needs but it will help us gain a deeper understanding of the procedures.
S25-R055|Q10|A virtual space to work on group projects together seems like a good idea. Also, maybe a virtual space to move around in an operating room or even try to do the procedures yourself could be interesting.
